0.1	This written aide-mémoire is called the Anthology of Zädspram son of Gušn-Jam.
0.2	Praise to the Creator Ohrmazd, to the Ameshas Spentas, to all the gods menog and gétig.
0.3	Words of the herbed Zädspram son of Gušn-jam, (originally) from the south.
1.1	It is thus revealed in the Religion that the light (was) above and the darkness below, and between the two there was an open space.
1.2	Ohrmazd (was) in the light, Ahreman in the darkness, and Ohrmazd knew of Ahreman's existence and also that he would come to fight him, (but) Ahreman did not know of the existence of the light and Ohrmazd.
1.3	Ahreman lived in the darkness, in the lower regions, so he ascended, by chance, to the upper regions, and he saw a ray of light; and because of the difference in nature from his own, he strove to attain it, and to have power over it in the same way as over the darkness
1.4	When he reached the boundary, Ohrmazd, with a view to driving Ahreman from his own kingdom, presented himself to battle, and with a pure and divine word, he confounded him and cast him back into darkness. To protect himself from the Druz, he created in the mēnóg state in the highest (place), the mēnōg of the sky, water, earth, plants, cattle, man, and fire, and he preserved (them) for three thousand years.
1.5	Ahreman also prepared means in the darkness. At the end of the three thousand years, he returned to the boundary and threatened, saying: "I will strike you, I will strike your creatures, the creatures you created in the mênőg state, tol who are the Good Spirit, I will destroy everything with this."
1.6	Ohrmazd replied: "No, O Druz, you are not all-powerful!"
1.7	Again Ahreman threatened (him): "I will cause every bony being to hate you and love me."
1.8	Ohrmazd in (his) Menogian wisdom saw that Ahreman was capable of doing the very thing he had threatened (to accomplish), if the time of the fight were not limited.
1.9	Accordingly, he called upon Time for help, for he saw that Ahreman would not agree with the judgment of any luminary. Time is for both (parties) and is necessary for cooperation and a fair settlement, millennia.
1.10	And (Ohrmazd) divided it into three periods, each period (being) three
1.11	Ahreman agreed.
1.12	Ohrmazd saw that, since it was not possible to surround Ahreman, (for) whenever he wished, he would return to his dark depths, many means would be prepared, and the fight would be endless; so after fixing the time, he recited the Ahunawar.
1.13	And by the Ahunawar he was shown three kinds (of things).
1.14	First, that everything good is the will of Ohrmazd
1.15	From this it is clear that if good is the will of Ohrmazd, it is clear that there is something that is not according to the will of Ohrmazd, inevitably this (comes) from a principle of a different substance.
1.16	Secondly, (there is) this: he who does the will of Ohrmazd will possess reward and retribution, (but) he who does not do the will of Ohrmazd will possess chastisement and punishment.
1.17	By this is manifested the reward of the virtuous and the punishment of sinners, and the reason for the existence of paradise and hell, by which the aptitude for opposition is explained.
1.18	Thirdly, it was shown that he who [gives protection] to the poor increases the kingdom of Ohrmazd
1.19	He showed that the rich must help the needy, just as educated people teach the ignorant, and those who are rich in goods give generously to those in need, that is, the help of the creatures of Ohrmazd to one another in an energetic struggle.
1.20	Thus the accomplishment of Renovation can be done by these three things:
1.21	First, the right religion which (is) itself a profession of two principles, in this way and manner that Ohrmazd (is) all goodness and devoid of malice, and his will is all good, (while) Ahreman (is) all malice and devoid of goodness.
1.22	Second, the hope of reward and retribution in the virtuous, the fear of chastisement and punishment in sinners, and the striving toward good action and abstention from sin
1.23	Third, the collaboration of creatures with one another, and from mutual aid (results) a joint army; from the joint army (results) victory over the enemy, which is itself Renovation.
1.24	By these words, he [Ahreman] was confounded and fell back into darkness.
1.25	Ohrmazd created the creatures with a body in the gerig state: first- ly, the sky; secondly, water; thirdly, the earth; fourth- ly, plants; fifth, cattle; sixth, man, and the fire was in all, disseminated everywhere, all like six substances whose Search Q D Share The duration of creation was as long, it is said, as (the time) to lower one eyelid over the other.
1.26	For three thousand years, creation was endowed with a body without movement. The sun, the moon, and the stars stood without moving in the heights.
1.27	At the end of the period, Ohrmazd observed: "What is the advantage of creating creatures if they (are) incapable of running, walking, or moving?" And with the help of the Firmament and Zurwân, he created creation.
1.28	Zurwän was unable to advance Ohrmazd's creatures without (also) advancing Ahreman's creatures, because the Principles were detrimental and opposed to one another
1.29	And considering the end (of time), he [Zurwån] gave Ahreman an instrument of the same essence of darkness to which Zurwān's strength was bound and which was like frog skin, black and ash-colored.
1.30	And giving it (to him), he said: "With these weapons Āz will devour what belongs to you, and will herself die of hunger if, at the end of the nine thousand years, you do not accomplish what you threatened (to do), after the pact has been made and the time determined."
1.31	Immediately, Ahreman with his accomplices came to the sphere of the stars
1.32	He drew from there down into the void the base of the sky, which was placed in the sphere of the stars (void), which is external to the foundation of the (regions) of light and (that of the regions) of darkness, and the place of combat in which both will attack each other.
1.33	And the darkness that he held with him, he carried into the sky. He thus drew the sky towards the darkness, so that within the roof of the sky, a proportion of one-third reached above the sphere of the stars.
2.1	It is revealed in religion that, in the month of Fravardin, on the day of Ohrmazd, at noon, (Ahreman) came to the boundary of the sky;
2.2	because of the difference in the nature of the sky, he was afraid, as a sheep trembles (before) the wolf. Ahreman, heating and burning (everything), appeared in the (sky).
2.3	Then he came to the water that is under the earth and inflicted darkness and a bad taste on it.
2.4	And he arose in the midst of the earth.
2.5	Like a serpent (coming out) of a pit, he arose and there was an trembling of the whole earth, and this passage through which he arose is the very path to hell into which the demons and the damned rush
2.6	Then he came to the plants,
2.7	which were like a single stalk about a foot high, without branches or bark, fresh and soft. And the strength of every kind of plant was in its nature, and it was almost in the middle of the earth. Immediately it withered
2.8	Then he came to the ox, created uniquely,
2.9	whose height was like (that of) Gayõmard. He stood on the bank of the Däiti River, in the middle of the earth, and his distance from Gayömard was equal to his own height. Likewise, he was distant from the bank of the Dätti River in the same proportion. And it was a female, white and luminous like the moon. When the adversary arrived, Ohrmazd gave him henbane to eat, which is also called "bang," and he rubbed it before (his) eyes so that, following the blow, (his) pain and (his) distress would be less. She became weak and sick, fell on her right side, and died
2.10	Before (Ahreman) advanced towards Gayömard, his height was three spears of Zoroaster, he was luminous like the sun. Ohrmazd created sleep in the form of a man fifteen years old, luminous and tall. And he sent to Gayömard and conferred sleep on him in a duration equal to that of the recitation of an Ahuna vairya
2.11	When (Gayōmard) arose from (his) sleep, and his eyes were opened, he saw the world that had become dark as night; all over the earth, similar to? (mad), were snakes, scorpions, frogs, and many kinds of xrafstars, quadrupeds, and other species of aerial beings, so much so that not a needle's point remained (without) the xrafstars rushing upon it. The planetary sun in conjunction with the planetary moon and the five planets, and many beings of dark bodies of the appearance and shape of a dragon in the expanse of the atmosphere, went to the attack, and the cries and roars of the arch-demons were violent.
2.12	Finally he came to the fire and mixed the dark smoke with the (fire).
2.13	Gošurvan, as he himself was the soul of the uniquely created ox, when the ox passed away, came out of the ox, as the soul (comes out) of the body of the dead, in the same way he cried out to Ohrmazd, lamenting, like an army of a thousand (men) when they lament together.
2.14	Ohrmazd, who was previously no longer able to protect Gayomard, (then) because of the mixed state of the creatures, ascended from the earth into the sky, and Göšurvan went behind him, lamenting, and he cried out to him: "To whom have you abandoned sovereignty over the creatures?"
2.15	This was the highest dominion of Ahreman, for with all the strength he possessed, he came to defile the creatures, and (Ahreman) made the base of the sky to the extent of a third which was lowered, as a main fortification, so that (the sky became) all dark, without light, which is and 000 Note Search tools Q Share happened precisely in the coming of the adversary and enemy in the battles against God.
2.16	And this is oriented toward the accomplishment of the renovation, for as soon as the greatest of the Druz has appeared, all other instruments that (come) from the force of the same principle, day after day, will be rejected, and the accomplishment of the renovation is this: when the enemy that has appeared will be completely prevented.
2.17	Between these two (events), (there is) the combat arranged in the state of mixture
2.18	Ahreman [said]: "Victory has come to me completely, for I have broken the sky and defiled it with darkness and gloom, and I have made it a fortress, and I have defiled the water, and I have pierced the earth and corrupted it with darkness, and I have dried up the plants, and I have destroyed the ox, and I have made Gayomard sick, and I have organized the dark planets against the luminaries, and I have taken the kingdom (of Ohrmazd), and there remained no one in the fight on Ohrmazd's side except one man who, alone, what could he do?"
2.19	And he sent Astvihäd with a thousand known illnesses, which are themselves illnesses of all kinds, to make Gayōmard sick and destroy him, but they found no way, for the decision belonged to the decider Zurwän from the beginning, at the time of Ahreman's coming, namely, "for thirty winters, (for) Gayōmard the strong, I will decree that his life be saved."
2.20	And (it) was in his sphere that his situations in the state of mixture were manifested according to the decree of the beneficial and the harmful
2.21	And for this reason, until thirty years had passed, they found no means, for he originally decreed that the star Jupiter is life over creatures, not by its own essence but because it serves as a link between the luminaries, and that Saturn is death over creatures. Both were at the origin of creation by their own apogee. As Jupiter was in its ascendant, Cancer, which is also called the (House of) Life, for it is a place in which vitality is distributed, Saturn was in Libra, in the Polaris below the earth, through which the very force of mortality is more manifest and more dominant. And because of the apogee of both of them, Gayomard continued to live by himself
2.22	And for thirty years, Saturn did not return to (its) apogee, which is Libra. At the time when Saturn came into Libra, Jupiter was in Capricorn, which is its perigee, and because of Saturn's victory over Jupiter, Gayomard fell on his left side and died IN Search tools Q Share TRANSLATION CHAPTER 3
3.1	As (Ahreman) had corrupted the creatures one after another, by this same evil (?) he showed his great power.
3.2	For when he came inside the sky, the měnóg of the sky, like a valiant warrior who has put on metal armor, who is himself the sky in metal, in a loud voice and with violent cries, said to Ahreman: "Now that you have come, I will not let you return," and he waited until Ohrmazd had arranged around the sky another, harder fortress which is called the knowledge of the righteous
3.3	And the frawashis of the righteous, warriors around the fortress, on horseback, spear in hand, he arranged them like the hair on their heads, in the likeness of prison guards who protect the prison from the outside, and do not let the enemy out, locked within (its) boundaries.
3.4	Immediately Ahreman strove to return to his camp of darkness but he found no passage, and with thoughts of doubt, he felt the fear of the culmination of the nine thousand years and the end of the Renovation in nature
3.5	As it is said in the Gathas: so the two menogs came together at this first creation, that is, the two menogs came into Gayōmard's body—one for life, the activity of Ohrmazd is considered very alive, the other for non-life, the Evil Spirit [in this activity] until it is killed, and this will be the case until the end in the world, that is, other men will meet, and the worst condition of the wicked. Ahreman saw destruction for the wicked; likewise, Ohrmazd (saw) for the righteous the best thought, that is, the hope of eternity.
3.6	This was the first combat of heaven with Ahreman
3.7	When, secondly, (Ahreman) came to the water, on the very day he threw himself into the watery Cancer, which is of watery essence, Tištar, also watery, (in the House) of Azarag which is called Life, created the clouds. During this day, the descendants are visible like the ascendants, the propagation of creatures is (due) to the sign of Cancer which is the fourth sign, the watery lord, the organizer, Tištar the angel (is) the lord of the fourth month. This is why the month of Tir is the fourth month of the year. of the earth.
3.8	Tištar called the Wind for help and Wahman and Höm as guides, and Burz of the family of waters as collaborator, and the righteous frawashis to keep the measure, were associated (with him). He changed himself into three forms, the for- IN Search tools Share soul of man, the form of ox, the form of horse. He changed into each form for ten nights in the light, and for thirty nights, he let rain fall to kill the xrafstars.
3.9	And the drops each separately became a large bowl in which the water is drawn upwards. By the (rain) many xrafstars were killed except for a few winged beings who penetrated to the heart
3.10	Then the wind měnõg appeared on the earth in the form of a luminous and tall man, and like a man he had wooden shoes on his feet.
3.11	Just as the soul when it moves the body and the body sets itself in motion by joint force, this wind měnôg which is in nature sets the wind of the atmosphere in motion, and the wind blew over the whole earth jointly
3.12	And he swept the water away and threw it back onto the sides of the earth, and the result was the Fräxkard Sea, which contains a third of this earth. Within it are kept a thousand springs called the sheets of the lake, a thousand springs of water whose water comes from the seas and lakes and flows towards the (Fräxkard Sea).
3.13	And each lake and each spring of water is of such a size that a swift rider (who) runs around it on an Arab horse will reach it in forty days, that is, one thousand nine hundred parasangs of the longest, each parasang (being) at least twenty thousand feet.
3.14	Then the xrafstars died, and the poison that comes from them mingled with the earth. To destroy this poison, Tištar descended into the sea, and the demon Apoš rushed against (him).
3.15	In the first battle, defeat fell to Tištar in the conflict, and he supplicated Ohrmazd, who brought him strength through sacrifice, litanies, and praise. Thus strength arose in Tištar, as much as ten male horses, ten male camels, ten male bulls, ten mountains when overturned, ten navigable rivers when brought together.
3.16	And he made the demon Apoš flee in defeat, and kept him away from the sources of the sea, and by a cup and a medium jar that he obtained from the frawashis (as) a function, he drew water as much as possible and most violently, he made it rain to strike him with drops as large as a man's head and an ox's head, large and small
3.17	In the clouds and the rain there was the attack and the fight of Tištar and Fire Wazišt against the opponents Apōš and Sponjagr. Fire Wazišt struck Sponjagr with a club of fire in the clouds; for ten days and ten nights there was rain and thanks to it the poison of the xrafstars was dissolved. Then the wind pushed (the water) back towards the sea Fråxkard, it divided into three, and from it were (born) the three seas which are called Püidig, Kamrüd and Syäwbun IN Search tools Q or Share
3.18	Among these, Püidig is itself a salty cauldron, in which the ebb and flow takes place, and the connection of the ebb and flow depends on the moon, and all its changes are manifested by the moon's ascendants and descendants.
3.19	And the (sea) Fräxkard lies on the south side toward the Alburz, and (the sea) Püidig is in the same region, and between them is Lake Sadwes, which is connected with (the star) Sadwes, which (is) in the southern region; and the seas (are) under the responsibility of the moon, in whose movement all things are, in increase and decrease, ebb and flow
3.20	It is designated: Two winds run before the moon, and they have their dwelling in (Lake) Sadwes, one expiring and the other inhaling; through the one that expires there is the ebb and through the one that inhales there is the ebb.
3.21	And Lake Sadwes itself is on the side of the sea Fråxkard; it rejects the impurity and pollution of the salt sea when it flows into the Fraxkard, by a great, high wind until what is clear goes away purified into the Fråxkard and the springs of Ardvisür
3.22	Besides these three largest seas, (Ohrmazd) then caused two rivers to flow from the Alburz to the north, the Arang (Ranha) and the Weh (Daiti). And the Arang (Ranha), which is the Tigris, flows westward, and the Weh eastward; they turned at both ends and went into the sea <Fraxkard>.
3.23	After them, eighteen great rivers came from the same Alburz. These twenty rivers, which have their source in the Alburz, descend into the earth and reappear in the Xwanirah
3.24	Then, two sources of the sea were opened in the earth, and are called Lake Čečast, (which is) salty, hot, without current, without animals, on the banks of which stands the triumphant fire Gušnasp; and secondly, (Lake) Sowar, which throws all the dirt onto the banks and keeps itself clear and pure, like the eye, which throws all dust and impurity to the sides. Because of its depth, what enters the sea does not reach the bottom, and close to it stands the fire Südig-Mihr, (i.e., the fire) Burzen-Mihr.
3.25	This was the second combat with water.
3.26	Since in the third place, (Ahreman) came towards the land, the said land was designated to oppose him
3.27	Just as the Alburz, which is at the edge of the earth, was raised by the breaking and shaking of the earth, so the other mountains in the middle of the circle of the earth arose, numbering two thousand two hundred and forty-four. And the earth is arranged in relation to it [= the mountain], and plants sprout and grow in it, and animals feed on it, and men derive great benefit and help from it IN Search tools Q Share
3.28	It is thus revealed that, before (Ahreman) came to assault creation, for a thousand years the substance of the mountains was created in the earth. It is known that, since the adversary had come to the earth, it grew during the trembling and rose above the earth like a tree whose branches grow above and its roots below.
3.29	The roots of the mountains were intertwined with each other; they had been arranged in a single connection, and the way and passage of waters had been created in them from below upwards, so that the waters flow into them like blood in the veins, from the whole body, maintaining strength and pressure toward the heart
3.30	All the mountains other than the Alburz were completed in six hundred years.
3.31	The Alburz grew for eight hundred years, for two hundred years to the sphere of the stars, for two hundred years to the sphere of the moon, for two hundred years to the sphere of the sun, for two hundred years to the sky.
3.32	After the Alburz, Mount Abarsen is the largest, which is also called Mount Abursām, whose origin is in Seistan and its end at the border of Fårs towards China
3.33	It is also revealed that after the great rain which (was) at the origin of creation and the sweeping of the water by the wind into the sea, the earth (was divided) into seven portions, a little below(?). Since after the rain, the earth was torn in different places, by the wind alone, a portion equal to half of the whole earth broke from the middle, another, around (the earth) broke into six portions of equal proportion.
3.34	They are called regions for this reason that they are distinguished from each other by a furrow
3.35	The middle is the Xwanirah, which is the middle portion, and the six regions (are) similar to a crown. A part of the Fräxkard Sea extends around (the first). Between the six regions, in the southern direction, a sea and a forest were made; in the northern direction, a high mountain grew so that they (the six regions) became separate from each other and quite distinct.
3.36	This was the third battle against the earth.
3.37	As in the fourth place, (Ahreman) came to the plant, then he fought against this same plant, and the plant withered. Amurdad, whose material sign is plants, seized it and (chopped) it finely, pounded it, and mixed it with rainwater from Tištar
3.38	After the rain, shoots appeared all over the earth. Ten thousand main species and one hundred thousand species with subspecies grew, of all kinds and genera, and (Ohrmazd) arranged the ten thousand species for the prevention of ten thousand diseases IN A Search pols Q day Share
3.39	After this, (Ohrmazd) took the seeds of the ten thousand species of plants, and by the union of the seeds he created in the middle of the sea Präxkard the tree of all seeds, from which all species of plants grow, and the bird Sen keeps its nest there; when it flies into (the tree), the dry seeds must fall into the water (and) by the rain they will fall back to the earth.
3.40	And he created in the vicinity of this tree the white hõm, opposition to old age, which revives the dead, which makes the living immortal.
3.41	This was the fourth fight against the plants.
3.42	As in the fifth place, (Ahreman) came to the cattle, then he fought against this same cattle
3.43	When the uniquely created ox died, because it had a vegetable nature, fifty-seven species of cereals and twelve species of medicinal plants grew from each member, the details of which, one by one, that is, from which member, are revealed in the Dāmdåd (nask).
3.44	Each plant that grew from a member made that member grow, as it is said that where the ox scattered the marrow on earth, cereals then grew: peas, sesame, millet, and lentils,
3.45	since sesame, because of its marrow nature, is itself a marrow that makes the marrow flourish.
3.46	And this is further said that from the blood (comes) the child <of the vine>, the wine, i.e., the wine is itself blood, and it is vegetable; it is very helpful for the whole nature of the blood
3.47	And this is further said that from the nose (wēnīg) (comes) the vetch (mas) which is called wenōg (vetch), and the appellation of wēnōg (vetch) was also after the nose.
3.48	And this is further said that from the lungs (comes) mustard to cure lung disease.
3.49	From the middle of the head (comes) the stalk of Wahman marjoram to counter the stench of Akoman and the perversity coming from sorcerers
3.50	And then (Ohrmazd) took from the ox's seed the very light that (was) in its strength and carried it into the moon, and entrusted to the god Mah the light that was in the ox. In his time and by this (Ohrmazd) purified the seed there by the light of the moon, and he developed it into many natures, and he gave it the vital soul, and from there he created it in the Erānwěz.
3.51	First a pair of bovids, male and female, then other species until the two hundred and eighty-two species were complete. They appeared on earth, to a length equal to two parasangs of the longest IN TRANSLATION: CHAPTERS
3.52	And the quadrupeds walked on the earth, the fish swam in the water, and the birds flew in the air; two by two, at the time of mating, they united, and from this resulted their pregnancy and birth, and the detail of their divisions is as follows:
3.53	They were first divided into three, which are the quadrupeds that walk on the land, and the fish that swim in the water, and the birds that fly in the air. Then into five species, which have their dwelling in five places, which are called aquatic, subterranean, aerial, wild, and domestic. Aquatic are the fish, the small (and) large cattle, the sheep, the wild beasts, the dog, and the birds that (live) in the water. Subterranean (are) the marten, the rat, and all the others that dwell and move in holes; and aerial, (these are) all the birds: those that go about freely, (these are) the wild beasts that cannot be domesticated, those that are worthy of pasture, (these are) all those that are kept in flocks and in pasture
3.54	Then he divides them into categories, which are quadrupeds with round hooves, double hooves, five-clawed animals, birds, and fish, just as those with round hooves (are) all one (category) which is called horses, and those with double hooves (are) numerous, like the camel, the ox, the sheep, the goat, and the others with double hooves. Those with five hooves (are) the dog, the hare, the rat, and the marten, etc., and then the birds and fish.
3.55	And then he divides them into species, like the horse: eight species, the donkey two species, the ox fifteen species, the sheep five, the goat five, the dog ten, the hare five, the marten eight, the rat eight, the bird one hundred and ten, and the fish ten, the details of which are not specified, some names are known, others unknown, all together (make) two hundred and eighty-two species, and with the subspecies, ten thousand kinds
3.56	The birds were created in eight groups: from the largest to the smallest he made them grow like a man sowing cereals, scattering first the large seeds, then the medium ones, then the small ones.
3.57	Of these species, the details of which are specified in the Damdad, and I have written a summary in the book of the enumeration of races, in this place, what is described is a summary.
3.58	Regarding the species of horses, first the Arabian, and their chief is the white with yellow ears; second the Persian, and the mule, the ass, the onager, the hippopotamus, and the others.
3.59	And (there are) two principal camels: of the plain and of the mountain, <one-humped> and two-humped
3.60	Among the species of bovids, (there are) the white, the dark blue, the red, the yellow, the black, the piebald, and the deer, the buffalo, the giraffe, the dolphin and others IN Search Q day Share
3.61	Among the sheep, those with tails and those without, and the Tagal sheep (ram) and the mouflon, as if it had three humps and a large horn, and it is also suitable as a beast of burden and was the mount of Manuščihr.
3.62	Among the goats, the oryx, the Arab (?), the billy goat (?), the gazelle, and the ibex.
3.63	Among the martens, the white ermine, and the black ermine, the marten, the squirrel, the beech marten, and others
3.64	Among the rats, <one is the musk rat>, another the aconite rat, which eats the poison of the aconite, but does not die from it. It was created for this very great benefit, namely that if it eats aconite, the aconite will be much less successful in poisoning creatures; a kind of rat of black color: those that the garzag snake bites, which is also called the makög pës snake (?), which is abundant in the region of the sea, or it throws (its) eggs into the food it eats, and then the garzag snake is born in its body, if on the limb that was bitten (or in the food) where there is conception of a garzag snake, (the black rat) urinates, it will be immune to the disease
3.65	Among the birds, he created two, of different natures among others, which are the Sen bird/the simory and the bats which possess a mouth and teeth and feed their young with the milk from their breasts.
3.66	This was the fifth fight against the cattle.
3.67	As in the sixth place, (Ahreman) came to Gayōmard, (Ohrmazd) designated against (him) this same Gayōmard.
3.68	As Gayōmard listened to the pure holy word of Ohrmazd, he meditated the Ahunawar with a righteous intention to strike the druz.
3.69	When he died, due to his metallic nature, eight kinds of metals are produced by each limb, which are gold, silver, iron, copper, tin, lead, crystal, and steel
3.70	Because of the excellence of gold, (it) was created from the (vital) soul and the seed.
3.71	Gayōmard having died, Spandarmad gathered the gold and for forty years it remained in the earth.
3.72	At the end of the forty years, (in) the form of a rhubarb, Mašē and Mašāně were produced, related to each other, of the same stature and shape.
3.73	But the xwarrah arose between them, in their similar stature so that it was not clear which was male and which female, and which was the xwarrah created by Ohrmazd.
3.74	It is this xwarrah in which humanity was created
3.75	As it is said in religion: which came first, the xwarrah or the body? And Ohrmazd said: "I first created the xwarrah, then for this xwarrah that had been created, the body was created," that is, he created the function and he created the body for the function IN Find tools Q she has TRANSLATION CHAPTER 3
3.76	Then they evolved from the plant form to the human form, and the xwarrah entered them spiritually.
3.77	As in the seventh place, (Ahreman) came to the fire, so he fought against that same fire. Fire was divided into five kinds, which are called "prosperous," "which spreads good," "the most pleasing," "the most profitable," and "whose benefit is high."
3.78	And (Ohrmazd) himself created the "prosperous" fire in the Garödmän and it manifests itself in the fire that burns on the earth, and its prosperity is that (it benefits) all species from its own nature.
3.79	(He "who spreads good") is the one who is in men and animals, and digesting food, heating the body, and making the eyes bright are among (his) functions
3.80	The "most pleasing" is the one who is in the plants, in whose seed it is produced, and piercing the earth, boiling water, heating it, thanks to which the plants produce delicious, beautiful, and fragrant flowers, and ripening fruits, adorning them with many tastes, are in (his) functions.
3.81	The "most profitable" is the one who moves in the clouds and strikes the darkness and gloom of the atmosphere, and making the dirt of the air fine, light, and natural, melting hail, and heating the water contained in the cloud with measure, making it drop-like and hot, are in (his) functions
3.82	The (fire) "whose benefit is high" is the one in the sky, that xwarrah whose abode is in the Wahram fire, like the householder (rules) over the house, whose increasing strength (comes) from the luminous brilliance of the fire, from the burning of incense, from the purity of the place of praise of the gods, and from the practice of good deeds.
3.83	And he fights against the spiritual druz, those who have the forms of witches, who arise from the sea, and who assume a bodily appearance; with stench and defilement they oppose the luminaries, and with sorcery they pervert creatures, and to strike, burn, and destroy sorcerers and witches, and especially during the night to protect the sleepers, to be a helper with Sroš the righteous, (are among his) duties
3.84	And during the original creation, (Ohrmazd) entrusted the whole earth for its protection to the marvelous fire Farrbay, the valiant fire Gušnasp, and the fire Burzén-Mihr full of advantages, for they are priest, warrior, and cultivator.
3.85	The fire Farrbay took its place on the mountain endowed with xwarrah in Chorasmia, the fire Gušnasp on Mount Asnwand in Azerbaijan, and the fire Burzen-Mihr on Mount Rewand, on the Wištāsp Range.
3.86	And the material manifestation of (xwarrah) in the world was greatest during the reign of Höšang, when men, with the ox Srisög, IN TRANSLATION CHAPTER 4 They had gone from the Xwanirah to other climes. In the middle of the road, a nutt, as a result of a violent wind, the fire container which (was) fixed on the back of the ox in three places, in which the fire was found, fell into the sea and by substitution this single great fire appeared, divided into three, (which) were founded in three hearths, and they themselves became three xwarrah, whose dwelling was the Farrbay fire, the Gušnasp fire and the Burzën-Mihr fire.
4.1	(It is) in the resemblance of the birth of children, which (is done) by two joint forces, which are the acceptance of the seed by the mothers and the restitution (of the children) to the fathers from birth
4.2	The temporary struggle in the state of mixture (occurs) essentially through two instruments: <one>, royalty which (is) of the same family as religion, and the other, religion which is of the same family as royalty.
4.3	When the religion of the Mazdeans, in time, passed from the material arrangement back to a spiritual nature, it appeared on earth first through Spandarmad, then through Ohrmazd, as the acceptance of children by mothers and their restoration to fathers.
4.4	The appearance of religion through Spandarmad took place at the time when Fräsyäb parted the waters of Iran; to bring the waters back, (Spandarmad) in the form of a young girl, into the house of Manuščihr, ruler of Iran who had debated with non-Iran, thus made himself visible
4.5	And she put on a luminous garment that shone in all directions, at a distance of a hazard equivalent to a parasang.
4.6	And she kept tied around her waist a golden belt, which was itself the religion of the Mazdeans, for religion is a bond in which are joined thirty-three bonds against the thirty-three sins into which all sins are divided.
4.7	The young girls who had seen that Spandarmad had tied the belt, in order to appear beautiful, then hastened to tie a belt.
4.8	This itself was the birth of the religion that was given by Spandarmad, five hundred and twenty-eight years before Zoroaster came to the interview, the details of which (are in) the essential book of the Ancients according to religion.
4.9	The name of Zoroaster was invoked over the countries three hundred years before (he had) his interview IN Search for tools Q Approver
4.10	It is thus revealed that, at the time when Türân debated with Iran in the region of Nawazag (?), which also (belonged) to a herbed, Ohrmazd, in order to (stop) the debate, created a large ox on whose hooves appeared in writing the boundaries of Iran to Türân, and which was kept in a forest.
4.11	Whenever there was a debate, the boundaries were recognized by the ox, until Kay-Us, very determined, desired that part of the land of Türân become Iran again.
4.12	But he saw that as long as the ox existed, it would be more difficult to do so, for with the sovereignty that was his, he did not want the boundaries to be manifested by the ox
4.13	There were seven brothers, and the seventh, Srid, who is called the seventh, (was) tall in body and very strong, and he helped Kay-Us in many matters, and he was among the nobles. Kay-Us summoned him before (him) and ordered him: "Go kill the ox in the forest!"
4.14	Srid went away. When he wanted to kill the ox, (it) debated with him, speaking (like) a man: "Do not kill me, for if you kill me, the one whose frawashi, in the hõm that wards off death, will appear on earth, whose name is Zoroaster the Spitamid, will tell of your evil deed in the world, and the misfortune for your soul will be such as is revealed in religion, namely, it will be for this evildoer what is proclaimed to be the worst (thing). And for you, the death that (results) from it will be equivalent, and that which is mixed with death, i.e., (that which) happens to him is worse than death itself (?)."
4.15	When Srid had waited for these words, he turned back and returned to Kay-Us, to inform him of the circumstances. He also told him this: that the ox had spoken miraculously, and that anyone on earth who is very desirous of justice can now order the ox to be killed?
4.16	And Kay-Us, wanting to fight, replied: "It is not clear whether the one whose frawashi (is) in the hôm that wards off death himself exists or not; and if he exists, will he be born and appear or not?" And he ordered sternly: "Go and kill him!"
4.17	Srid said: "I am not able to kill him, for I must have compassion on his complaint in (my) heart."
4.18	Kay-Us replied: You will go to such and such a forest, in which many witch chiefs dwell, and they will take away the compassion from your heart.
4.19	Srid went into the forest; he saw many witches who kept their mouths open, and they shouted (to him): Kill, without pity!
4.20	And compassion departed from his heart; he returned to the forest, and with his fist broke the ox's back in three places. The ox bellowed in a violent lamentation. 21 I.e., the one in which the ox was kept, cf. § 10 IN Search for ols Share TRANSLATION CHAPTERS
4.21	Srid, after the killing of the ox, as a result of the lamentation he had heard, was in a grave turmoil. He returned to Kay-Us and told him what had happened, and he asked him to order him to be killed, for his life was no longer desirable.
4.22	Kay-Us replied: I will not kill you, for you are indispensable to me.
4.23	Srid retorted: "If you do not kill me, then I will kill you."
4.24	Kay-Us said: "Do not kill me, for I am the ruler of the world."
4.25	Srid did not consent until Kay-Us ordered him: "Go to such and such a forest, for there is a witch there in the form of a dog and she will kill you."
4.26	Srid went into this forest and saw the witch in the form of a dog. So he killed this witch; she divided into two, but he struck until they became a thousand (witches), and they killed and tore Srid to pieces on the spot.
5.1	It is thus revealed that forty-five years before Zoroaster came to the interview, when Frèni gave birth to Zoroaster's mother, who is called Duydag, (the Brilliance) descended from the infinite light in the form of a fire and mingled with the fire that was before her. From the fire, she mingled with Zoroaster's mother, and for three nights appeared in the form of a fire on all sides of the passages of the house.
5.2	Passersby continually saw great lights
5.3	When she was fifteen years old, because of the Brilliance that (was) in her, and she was going on a journey, then her brilliance shone forth.
6.1	That is, his frawashi is in the man and his brilliance was created (in) the cow's milk. By the fact that his parents drank it, [the frawashi and the brilliance] then came to unite, as the details are manifested in the book on the rubrics of the Yasna people IN Search for ols Share
7.1	Zoroaster son of Porušasp, son of Fratarasp, son of Urwatasp, son of Hečatasp, son of Čixšnuš, son of Pitarasp, son of Arjataršu, son of Xardar, son of Spitama, son of Wedišt, son of Ayazim, son of Friy, son of Arj(an), son of Dürsraw, son of Manuščihr, son of Manusxwarwar, son of Manušxwarnak, son of Manuš, son of Neryōsang the envoy of Ohrmazd whose mother was Wizak, daughter of Arik, daughter of Sridak, daughter of Bidak, daughter of Frazušak, daughter of Zušak, daughter of Fraguzak, daughter of Guzak, daughter of Erëz, son of Fredon, son of Asplyän Completion of the Ten Aspiyan: Jam, son of Wiwanghan, son of Ayanghan, son of Ananghan, son of Höšang, son of Frawak, son of Siyamak, son of Meše, son of Gayōmard.
8.1	When (Zoroaster) was about to be born, Ahreman sent the demon of fever, pain, and (burning) wind, each with one hundred and fifty demons, to kill Zoroaster.
8.2	And they went in a mēnōg way to his mother, who was afflicted by fever, pain, and (burning) wind.
8.3	And from there, a parasang away, there was a sorcerer named Starag, who was a very healing sorcerer. Hoping to improve, she got up from (her) place and set out
8.4	Ohrmazd's messenger called out to him: "Do not go to the sorcerer, for he will not cure you, but return home, wash and rub your hands with the butter from the cow that was brought to the fire. Burn wood and incense on your body and on the child in your womb."
8.5	And she did so and recovered her health.
8.6	But again he [Ahreman] sent against her all his collaborators and accomplices, but they found no way and returned.
8.7	And they said: "We have not found a way because of the presence of fire on all sides, for whoever has help in excess will have no enemy against him."
8.8	So the very night he [Zoroaster] was born, Ahreman chose generals and organized an army, some of whom (say) with a thousand demons, others with two thousand demons attacking and charging they fight- IN Search Dols Q day Share Anr talent. The gods' counterattack was essentially (due to) the Brilliance itself, which had appeared at birth in the form of fire.
8.9	And because its brilliance and radiance had shone in distant places, they found no way.
8.10	Finally Ahreman sent Akoman, saying to him: "You are more Mendgian, you who are the most intimate; you will go into the mind of Zoroaster to deceive (him), and divert his mind towards us who are demons."
8.11	And Ohrmazd sent Wahman against him.
8.12	Akoman arrived before (lul), and had advanced towards the door, wishing to enter.
8.13	Wahman skillfully returned, saying to Akoman: "Enter!"
8.14	Akoman thought, "I must not do something that Wahnan told me (to do)." He left, Wahman entered and mingled with Zoroaster's spirit.
8.15	Zoroaster laughed because Wahman is the menog who makes one happy.
8.16	But seven sorcerers who were sitting before him, because of the light that shone brightly in the house, and his laughter at birth, unlike other men who cry at birth, were afraid.
8.17	And at the very moment of his birth, he received from Ohrmazd the directives on religion.
8.18	As it is said in religion, that he spoke at his birth, i.e., that you desire (to be) a lord, you who are a priest, namely the guide of creatures, announce it to me, that you must become dastür
8.19	As Zoroaster, because of (his) material body, had spoken in a material discourse, Ohrmazd answered him spiritually: Thus, as a rad—thus for the good, of the justice of whatever it is, I speak to the righteous by knowing, i.e., I am your dastur.
8.20	The second day arrived Porušasp, and he questioned sorcerers who were considered doctors in (that) place. “What is it when children cry at birth and what is it when they laugh?”
8.21	And they replied: “They cry because they see that they are destined to die in the end; he laughed because he saw his own (condition) of being saved.”
9.1	gl'n'nd st³lyh was born of Koxred, Koxrëd of Xēšm (and) Manušag, sister of Manuščihr.
9.2	At the time Zoroaster was born, there were five brothers, whose names were Brådröxš, Brādröyišn, Tür i Brådrēš, Azān (?), and Wasm IN
9.3	Their fivefold brotherhood, the middle one, Tür i Brädrēš, being Zoroaster's worst enemy, is similar to the fivefold brotherhood of the children of Porušasp, the middle one being Zoroaster.
9.4	Of Zoroaster's four brothers, two were before him, whose names (are) Ratuštar and Ranguštar, and two after, Wadriga and *Hindainiš.
9.5	Zoroaster's being in the middle is explained by his having been created at that time in the midst of the plaintiffs and defenders, namely, three millennia before and three after, so that he might teach the Elders about what had been and how (it was), and order creatures about what will be, how they should act
9.6	As it is said in the Gathas: "These two things, I ask you, O Ohrmazd, what has happened until now, what will happen from now on."
10.1	It is thus revealed that on the second day after the birth (of Zoroaster), Porušasp summoned one of the five brothers of the race of the "Karaps" and said to him: "Look at the signs and marks of my son Zoroaster!"
10.2	(The karap) went and sat before Zoroaster and seized his head and tightly embraced him so that he would be killed, and he protected the sorcerers so that they would be without fear of his fear and distress
10.3	Since Ohrmazd had sent Spandarmad, Ardwisür, and the holy frawashi of women to stay on earth for ten nights, no harm came to him, but the karap's hand withered.
10.4	This sorcerer asked Porušasp for Zoroaster's life for the harm that had befallen him as a result of his own action.
10.5	And at the same time, Porušasp seized Zoroaster and gave him to the karap, (saying): "Do with him what you will!"
10.6	The karap took him and threw him under the feet of the cattle that were going to water along a path. The first of the cattle in the herd stopped nearby and held back the 150 cattle that were walking behind him, and Porušasp seized (Zoroaster) and brought him home
10.7	And on the second day, the (karap) threw him under the horses' feet. The first of the horses stopped near Zoroaster, and held back the hundred and fifty horses that were walking behind him, and Porušasp seized (Zoroaster) and brought him home IN Search Share
10.8	And on the third day, wood was gathered and Zoroaster placed on it, and the fire was lit, but it was not burned at all, and this was the sign of the ordeal from which he escaped.
10.9	And on the fourth day, he was thrown into a wolf's den.
10.10	The wolf was not in its den. When it wanted to return to (its) hole, having reached twenty-four paces, it stopped in the same way [as the cattle and horses] and was dried up on the spot.
10.11	During the night, Wahman and Sröš the righteous brought into the hole a mouflon with udders (full) of milk, and until daybreak it gave milk drop by drop to Zoroaster
10.12	At dawn, Zoroaster's mother, hoping that she could bring his bones back from the hole, set out for that place.
10.13	And the mouflon ran out.
10.14	And the mother thought it was the wolf, and said to it: "You have devoured, being satiated with this (child), wait!" And she came forward; when she saw that Zoroaster (was) safe and sound, she seized him and said: "I will not give (him) to anyone during (my) life, not before the two villages here meet, Rây and Nödar
10.15	Since these two villages are in Azerbaijan, in the Mögän, fifty parasangs distant from Čēst, Zoroaster was from Ray and Wištāsp from Nödar. And these two villages, *Ray by the name of *Arjan son of Düsraw son of Manuščihr, from whose lineage was Zoroaster, and Nödar by the name of Nodar son of Manuščihr, from whose lineage was Wištāsp.
10.16	These were the signs at his birth.
10.17	One day, one of the five brothers, among the karaps, saw Zoroaster and looked at him for a long time, from above and below, on all sides, turning around
10.18	Porusasp asked him: "What is it that you are looking at from above, what is it that you are looking down at, on all sides?"
10.19	And he replied: "When I looked up, it was because I saw that the Brilliance (xwarrah) of this (child) was rising into the sky, by his word the souls of men will ascend to paradise; when I looked down, I saw likewise that because of him, the demons, the Druz, the sorcerers and witches will be buried beneath the earth, and will fall back defeated into hell. When I looked on all sides, I saw again that the word of this one will reach all the earth, and when it was according to the law of the seven countries, someone will have put on a cloak made of seven skins in which was the xwarrah of the seven Amesha Spentas."
10.20	And Tür i Brådaröxš advanced. When he went to the right, Zoroaster ran to the left, and when he went to the left, Zoroaster ran to the right, and Tür i Brädaröxš was hidden from him and did not reach him IN Search tools Share TRANSLATION CHAPTER II
11.1	This again is revealed that the demons, in the assembly of sorcerers and (their) advisors, cried out: "The child of Porušasp is unconscious, stupid, corrupt within, he does not take into account or accept advice from anyone, men or women."
11.2	The news reached Porušasp, and Porušasp said to Zoroaster: "I believed that a son was born to me, who would be a priest, warrior, and farmer, yet you are stupid and corrupt within. Go to the karaps so that they may cure (you)!"
11.3	Zoroaster replied: "You should think that your son is a priest, warrior, and farmer!"
11.4	And at Porušasp's command, he harnessed two horses to the chariot and set off with Porušasp.
11.5	When they arrived at the (named) place, Porušasp told the story as it was, before a karap, (one) of the five brothers.
11.6	This sorcerer took a bowl and urinated in it, and said: "Let your son drink from it, so that he may become healthy!"
11.7	And by this he intended to transform (Zoroaster) into their same nature.
11.8	Zoroaster said to Porušasp: "Give him back to the one who (is) your protector and master!" And he got up and returned to his place
11.9	On the way, Zoroaster gave water to the two horses because they were thirsty, and he thought: "My approach to the court of the karaps was useless, except for this one thing: by giving water to the horses, I have developed my soul."
12.1	This again is revealed that one day, Dürsraw the karap, i.e., (one) of the same five brothers, went to the house of Porušasp.
12.2	Porušasp placed a bowl of mare's milk before him and said: "Consecrate- it!"
12.3	Zoroaster challenged Porušasp: "I will consecrate it."
12.4	Porušasp replied: "He who consecrates is the one who is worthy," and they debated it three times
12.5	Zoroaster stood up, struck the bowl with his right foot and knocked it over IN
12.6	saying: "I celebrate justice, I sacrifice to the poor righteous, men and women. O Porušasp, prepare the portions for him who deserves them!"
12.7	And Dürsraw said to Zoroaster, "Since first through you I am deprived of the portion and the daily subsistence, consequently I set both eyes on you and I will destroy you."
12.8	Zoroaster replied: "I look into your eyes with perfect intention, and I will destroy you."
12.9	And they gazed at each other for a long time with keen observation(?), and Zoroaster's divine nature was victorious over his sorcery."
12.10	Dursraw rebelled and demanded his horse, saying, "It is not possible for me to stay because of this one." He mounted his horse. When he had advanced a little, he fell from his horse and died in great pain. And his children's children's children died immediately.
13.1	It is thus revealed that, when he was fifteen years old, the sons of Porusasp demanded (their) share from their father. And their share was granted to them by Porusasp.
13.2	Among the garments, there was a belt, doubled, the width of which was three fingers and could be wrapped three times around the waist; Zoroaster, having chosen it, girded himself with it
13.3	This was one of the directives of Wahman that had come into his mind at his birth, and he then turned him away from everything that is not customary, and in custom he made him ardent.
14.1	This again is revealed that there was a river that was called the "naked woman," Han, for the reason that, because of the strength and swiftness of the river, a woman, unless naked, could not cross it, and old people who, like those who according to religion are seventy years old, are called Han, could not, because of their weakness, cross (the river) by their own strength.
14.2	Zoroaster came to the edge of the water, among the women and old people there were seven individuals, and he made them cross as if by a bridge
14.3	(This) was the sign (that it will be) a bridge for the righteous, that is, it leads them to Paradise IN Search tools Q Share
15.1	It is revealed that the fodder that Porusasp had stored for the beasts of burden, not (only) in view of the years of scarcity for Porusasp's beasts, but out of compassion for the beasts of others, who, because of the years of scarcity, were eating each other's tails out of (their) hunger, (Zoroaster) gave them ample supply.
16.1	It is further revealed that, when he was twenty years old, in opposition to his father and mother, he turned away from home and went away.
16.2	And he asked: "Who desires justice most and feeds the poor most?"
16.3	And he was told: "The younger son of Tür, son of Urwētödah, who every day gives the poor an iron cup, the height of a horse, full of bread, milk, and other food."
16.4	Zoroaster went to that place and, in order to help him feed the poor, he brought as much food as two of the greatest men, and he was effective.
17.1	This is also revealed that he saw a dog that had given birth to seven pups, but it had been three days since she had found any food. Everything she saw, she put her mouth to, but she was as if dazed.
17.2	Zoroaster found a remedy; he quickly brought her bread, (but) when he had brought it, she was (already) dead.
18.1	This is further revealed that, when his father sought a wife for him, Zoroaster debated with the woman, saying: "Show me your face," so that he might see the face, form, and appearance (of the woman), even so that he might recognize her face (as) desirable or not people IN Search Fools Q Share TRANSLATION CHAPTER 19
18.2	But the woman turned her face away from me.
18.3	And Zoroaster said: "He (or she) who does not let me look at him will not cultivate respect for me."
19.1	This is further revealed that he came to a group (of people) who were among the most renowned in that place for their superabundant knowledge. And he asked them: What is most helpful for the soul? 7
19.2	They answered him: "To feed the poor, to give fodder to the cattle, to bring wood to the fire, to pour hõm into the water, and to celebrate much by speech the demons/dēvs, by the speech which is called Religion
19.3	Then Zoroaster fed the poor, grazed the cattle, brought bolş to the fire, and pressed the hõm into the water. Zoroaster never even slightly celebrated the demons with words.
20.1	It is thus revealed that thirty years having passed since he existed, in the month of Spandarmad and on the day of Anagrān, he had gone to this region, forty-five days after Nowrūz, to the festival called Wahärbüdag, a particularly well-known place where people had arrived from many regions to the place of celebration.
20.2	As Zoroaster was going to the place of celebration, he was walking and on the way, he fell asleep, alone, in a plain
20.3	And he saw in a dream that men of this world were making many preparations toward the north, until all the men on earth appeared in the north. And at their summit (he saw) Mëdyömäh son of Aråstây, for Arástāy and Porušasp were brothers; Mëdyömäh was the guide of all the men who had gone to meet Zoroaster,
20.4	and (this) showed that first Medyömäh, then all the bony beings, will be converted IN MUST in
21.1	At the end of the five days of the festival, in the month of Ardwahišt, on the day of Day pad Mihr, at dawn, Zoroaster, to press for höm, went to the banks of the river Daiti, since due to Zoroaster's interview at (this place), it is the chief of the streams.
21.2	The water was (at the height of) four dwellings and Zoroaster crossed it, the first up to the ankle, the second up to the knees, the third up to the separation of the two thighs, and the fourth up to the neck.
21.3	This showed that his religion would reach its peak in four times, the manifestation of which (will be due) to Zoroaster, Ušēdar, Ušēdarmah and Söšāns
21.4	When he came out of the water and had put on his clothes, he saw Wahman the Amahraspand, in human form, beautiful, luminous, sparkling, with parted hair, as that which is parted is a sign of duality; he had put on a garment like silk, in which there was neither cut nor seam, for he himself was the light and his height was nine (times) as much as (that) of Zoroaster.
21.5	And he questioned Zoroaster: "Who are you and whose are you, and what is most desirable to you, and what do you strive for?" 6) And he replied: "I am Zoroaster, the Spitamid, who most desires justice in the world, and I want to be informed of the will of the gods, and I will do justice as much as I am shown in the pure world
21.7	And Wahman ordered Zoroaster: "Go up to the assembly of the menogs!"
21.8	Whatever Wahman covered in nine steps, Zoroaster (did) in ninety steps, and when he had covered the ninety steps, he saw the assembly of the seven Amesha Spentas.
21.9	When he arrived within twenty-four steps of the Amesha Spentas, because of the great light of the Amesha Spentas, he did not see his shadow on the ground.
21.10	The place of the assembly was in Iran and in the region of Mögān, by the water of the Daiti.
21.11	Zoroaster paid homage, saying: "Homage to Ohrmazd, homage to the Amesha Spentas!" And he advanced and sat in the place (reserved) for those who question IN ols search when
22.1	<Zoroaster> asked Ohrmazd: "Who in the material world is the first of the perfect, and who is the second and who is the third?"
22.2	Ohrmazd replied: "The first perfection is Good Thought, the second Good Speech, and the third Good Action."
22.3	Zoroaster asked: "Who is good, who is the best, and who is the most perfect of all?"
22.4	Ohrmazd replied: "The name of the Amesha Spentas is good, their vision is the best, and their obedience is the most perfect of all."
22.5	Then He showed the duality of principles and spoke of the separation regarding every arrangement, namely: of these menogs, the wicked one has chosen evil deeds. Ahreman desired evil deeds, the holy spirit righteousness; Ohrmazd chose righteousness. He essentially showed the separation regarding every arrangement of light and darkness.
22.6	And he said: "Neither our minds, nor our will, nor our words nor our deeds, nor our religion, nor our worlds agree. Those who choose the light, their place will be with the lights, those who are dark, with the darkness."
22.7	And on the same day, he brought (to Zoroaster) omniscient wisdom three times. (In answer) to the same first question, he showed the sky in great light and clarity, and in showing it, he kept the darkness out of his sight because of the opposition of that darkness what (is) inside the belly became visible, the blood flowing out, one then rubbed one's hands over (lul), becoming (again) whole.
22.8	And he showed his nature to the measure of the sky, as he had his head at the top of the sky, his feet in the lower sky, and his hands reached all sides of the sky.
22.9	And he had clothed the sky like a garment, and the six Amesha Spentas were visible, the same size as him, so that each one appeared in succession (distinct) from another like a finger, the smallest.
22.10	The Amesha Spentas showed the three kinds of ordeals that (are) in religion.
22.11	The first by means of fires, and Zoroaster advanced three steps in Good Thought, Good Word, and Good Action, but he did not burn
22.12	Secondly, the hot metal was poured onto (his) chest, it cooled on him, he took it in (his) hands and gave it to the Amesha Spentas. Ohrmazd said: "After (the establishment of) the pure religion, when there is a dispute about religion, your disciples will pour it on the other [disputant], they will take it in (their) hands, thereby the whole material world will believe." IN Search for t or tools Q Share
22.13	Third, by cutting with a knife, then
22.14	This is the indication that you and your coreligionists accept the pure religion firmly and in secret, so that as a result of such a burn from the fire, the pouring of the hot metal, and the cutting by the blade, one should not turn away from the good religion.
23.1	The first talk because of his Ohrmazdian existence, Zoroaster, carrying an Ohrmazdian body, came to the talk on the banks of the Daiti River
23.2	The second (interview), because of Zoroaster's Wahmanic existence, among the five species of animals that are the material signs of Wahman, five came to the interview on Mount Usind. That day, even before they arrived at the interview, their tongues were loosed. They spoke in human speech. Among the aquatic fish, a species called "arzuh"; among (those that live) in holes, the white ermine and the white marten; among the birds, the Karšift bird and the Sen bird and other species; among those that roam freely (= wild animals), the hare that shows the way to water to wild beasts; and among those that are worthy of grazing (= domestic animals), the white oryx. And with human words they accepted the religion of Ohrmazd They were designated as the chief of the five species so that these very animals, in their own language, could propagate the religion, to the extent of their knowledge and ability. And he ordered Zoroaster not to kill or cause pain and to guard the five species of animals well, as he had commanded by a very insistent injunction.
23.3	The third interview, because of his Ardawahištian existence, the Ménög fires came to talk with Zoroaster, near the Töjän River (?). In this interview, he was shown how to guard the protection of the Wahram fire and the propitiation of all fires well.
23.4	The fourth interview, because of his šahrewarian existence, the spirit of metal came to talk with Zoroaster, in the district of Sray on the Mögän, and for the good guarding of the metals, he advised him to give weapons and armor to the (....).
23.5	The fifth conversation, because of his spandarmadian existence, the spirit of the countries, regions and provinces, districts and villages, as much as was necessary, came with Zoroaster to the conversation, on (Lake) Sadwes people IN Search Dols Q Share which is near the Araxes River, since it is a spring that comes from Mount Asnwand and goes to the Däiti. And regarding the protection and propitiation of the earth, he even advised that in each village a worthy witness should be appointed, in each district a judge knowledgeable in the law, in each province a mowbed with a right will, in each region a pure Rad [=magistrate]. Above all, there appeared a Counselor of the Magi and a Mowbed of mowbeds, and the sovereignty of Ohrmazd is thereby designated.
23.6	The sixth conversation: because of his Hordadian existence, the spirit of the seas and rivers came with Zoroaster to the conversation on Mount Asnwand, and he spoke to him about the protection and propitiation of water
23.7	The seventh conversation: Because of his Amurdădian existence, the spirit of the plants came with Zoroaster to the conversation, on the rapid "Darjen, at the water's edge of the Däiti, and in a different place, and he revealed to him the protection and propitiation of the plants.
23.8	The seventh conversation is shown during a winter which is five months a year.
24.1	This again, that at the end of ten years, Mēdyömäh son of Arästäy, believed in Zoroaster.
24.2	Then, after having obtained the conversations, he returned to the conversation with Ohrmazd and said: "I have converted a single man in ten years."
24.3	Ohrmazd said: "There will be days when few people will not be converted by you; it will be the creation in the world itself of the Resurrection, when, except for Dahäg, whoever will be converted at the creation of the accomplishment of the Renovation, but Dahäg, because he did not repent, will be killed."
24.4	In the same conversation, when (Zoroaster) from Ohrmazd came to Spandarmad, he perfectly memorized the religion in (his) mind
24.5	After this, for two years, the kays and karaps of Wištāsp, opponents (of Zoroaster), attributed thirty-three lies to him, by order of Wištāsp. These thirty-three lies are the indication of the thirty-trols of bad religions that came to oppose the religion of the "Yazads". (By) the revelation of Religion, the thirty-three bonds are the sign of the prevention of the thirty-three bad laws by the thirty-three excellent actions IN
24.6	The details have been revealed in Religion, Wištåsp's acceptance of the religion of Zoroaster, after the revelation according to justice, and of many kinds of prophecies and spiritual substances which were seen by the testimony of three Amesha Spentas whose words are superior and who appeared materially to Wištāsp and to the (members of) assemblies and courtiers, and who are Wahman, Ardwahišt and the fire Burzen-Mihr.
25.1	In the tenth year, Mēdyömäh was converted into the reed grove and the forest which are the place of wild boars
25.2	And in the twentieth year, Kawig (?) son of Kundă (?) was converted.
25.3	In the thirtieth year the Shionites arrived in the land of Iran, they took prisoner the most beautiful generation among the young girls.
25.4	In the fortieth year, Wohunem son of Öröštar was born.
25.5	In the forty-seventh year, Zoroaster will die, who will be seventy-seven years and forty days old, in the month of Ardwahišt and the day of Xwar. Because of the eight intercalary months, (the date) is postponed to the month of Day and the day of Xwar, as for the sacrifice (it is) the same month of Ardwahišt.
25.6	In the sixty-third year, Frašōštar will die
25.7	In the sixty-fourth year, Jāmāsp (will die), as he was Mowbed of mowbeds after Zoroaster.
25.8	In the sixty-third year, Hangõruš, son of Jāmāsp, will die.
25.9	In the eightieth year, Asmo-xwanwand will die.
25.10	In the eightieth year, Was-wiš-spāy (?), who is also called Axt the sorcerer, is killed (and) six of the greatest believers: two daughters of Zoroaster who are called Frën and Srid, and Ahlaw-stüd, son of Medyömäh, and three others who are particularly (known) to the religion
25.11	In the hundredth year, from Wohunēm, who was born in the fortieth year of the religion, Sen will be born; in the two hundredth year he will die with one hundred disciples.
25.12	In the three hundredth year, it will be night during the day, then religion will be disturbed and royalty shaken.
26.1	The first: do not go to people for an unauthorized dispute IN Search tools Q she has Share
26.2	The second, when they behave illegally towards you, propose legality!
26.3	The third, pure consanguineous marriage for the progress of the race (is) the best actions for the living, intended
27.1	First, do not sin.
27.2	Second, discern among thoughts, words, and actions. Essentially, discern between killing and not killing, as (between) harmful animals and livestock, between giving and not giving, as between the righteous and the worthy and the wicked and the unworthy
27.3	Third, having a dastür whenever one has the most learned and credible rad, by whom one is taught with wisdom, (he) will teach with more credibility.
27.4	Fourth, worship like the worship (rendered) to Ohrmazd is essentially to recognize and think that He is all good, creator and sovereign, to confess Him in one's religion, and to keep the belt fastened because (it is) the sign of one's religion. The worship of the lights with the niyayišn, and the worship of the four elements which are fire, water, earth and air which are material, and of the creatures from which they are made; pure and purified from carrion, menstruation, excrement and other impurities, they must be kept so that the natures which will be made from (these elements) will be of the healthiest, most fragrant, purest and least defective nature. The worship of men, (is) relative generosity in knowledge and goods, the worship for animals, (is) grazing, the least suffering and measured maintenance. The worship for plants, (is) to sow, ripen and destiny it for the food of worthy (people). The worship of the praise of all gods and lights and creatures, (is) to praise them as it is appropriate, and to fight against their adversaries because perfect praise is possible by the perfect recitation of religion. The worship of whoever, of his classes, (is) to advance the function as much as possible, in the least sinful way.
27.5	Fifth, to hold oneself to one's duty day and night with desire, to fight against one's own druz, for the duration of one's life, not to turn away from professing the Religion and not to abandon one's duty people IN A TRADUCTION:CHAPITRE 28 - The Ten Principles.
27.6	The first: To maintain the good reputation of one's leader, master, judge, and father, one must conduct oneself with a good reputation.
27.7	The second: To prevent one's relatives and leaders from acquiring a bad reputation, one must be very careful to protect oneself from such a bad reputation.
27.8	The third: To prevent one's master from striking or injuring one with the longest stick, one must not defame him by attributing to him what he did not learn from his own master.
27.9	The fourth: To avoid robbing the righteous, one must generously share what one's own master taught to those who are worthy.
27.10	The fifth: For the propagation of religion, one must establish, within the bounds of law, the reward of the righteous and the expiation of sinners.
27.11	The sixth, to make divine justice dwell in one's own home, is to keep the way open for righteous people to enter one's house.
27.12	The seventh, to avoid unreasonably increasing hatred in one's mind, is to refrain from hating righteous people and from remaining unrepentant of one's sins.
27.13	The eighth, to eradicate hatred from one's mind, is to banish hatred from one's thoughts and quickly repent of one's sins.
27.14	The ninth, is to recognize the advances and setbacks of religion, and to prefer the advances of religion, thereby desiring its work and its reward. And the setbacks: when an enemy attacks religion, one must keep religion at bay and consider oneself a shield of religion.
27.15	The tenth, for the sake of obedience, is to be attentive to the sovereign, the judge, and the authority of religion.
28.1	First, the Ahunawar is divided into three measures as indicated in another chapter. Similarly, the Gathas are also divided into three, which are three, four, and five verses (gah). Likewise, the nasks are divided into three, which are called Gath, Ritualist, and Legalist.
28.2	And then the Ahunawar is divided into six, which are called half-verses. Likewise, the Gathas, in six, which are called the Gatha Ahunauuaiti, the Gatha Haptanhäiti, the Gatha Uštauuaiti, the Gatha Spentä Mainiiu, the Gatha Vohuxšabrá, and the Gatha Vahištōišti. Likewise, the Nasks, in six W Search for ols Q Share like the Gåthås, into two which are called, one the Gâthic Gâthâs, that is, the Yasna, the other the other gâthâs. The hädamänsar is also into two: one the manthras full of signs and omés, that is, the Päzen and the Ratuštaltäy and the other, the manthras full of good signs, that is, the other hädamänsars. And also the legalists, into two (kinds): one, the law of separation of the demons, that is, the Vendidad, and the other the law of Zoroaster, that is, the other laws
28.3	Then there is a division into twenty-one like the Ahunawar into twenty-one words and the Gâthâs into twenty-one, that is, the Ahunawar, (the ašam vohu) and the divine activity of yanimmano (=Y.28.0) up to Erman (Y.54) which are together twenty-one; the nasks are (also) twenty-one
28.4	Then the Gâthâs are divided into two hundred and eighty-eight stanzas, the Nasks also into two hundred and eighty-eight divisions, each division comprising a chapter similar to the trunk (of a tree) (?), which concerns a thing whose nature has been shown, such as the Radestån of Dispute in which legal dispute is manifested, the Zahmestän by which expiation and injury are manifested, and the Störestän by which sins and the measures of reparation for injuries (caused) to cattle and small livestock are manifested, the "Warrior" in which combats are manifested, the Book of Shepherd Dogs by which the guards of cattle under their authority are manifested according to custom, the Book of Sowing by which agriculture is manifested, the Book of Ordeals by which ordeals and trials are manifested, and the others in the same way
28.5	Then the Gâthâs are divided into one thousand and sixteen verses and the nasks into one thousand and one fragards. As the Hädöxt nask is the chief of the nasks, Erman, the best saying on the resurrection of the dead, is the chief of the fragards, and it is attached to the other fragards like a thousand sheaves (?) of grain and fodder when, above these thousand, a large one is placed which protects them all from hail and rain, from hot wind and cold
28.6	And then the Gathas are divided into six thousand six hundred and sixty-six words, and the Nasks also together into six thousand six hundred and sixty-six, according to which the judgments are divided. The six thousand six hundred and sixty-six words in the Gathas manifest the coming of the Adversary upon creatures until the end of the six millennia. Each millennium has ten centuries, which makes sixty centuries, and each century has ten decades (wõix) during which cold and severe famine rage. There are six hundred decades, and each decade lasts ten years, which makes six thousand years. The first six words of the Gathas are the manifestation of the six millennia, and then the sixty: the sixty centuries, and the six hundred: the six hundred decades, and the six thousand: the six thousand years IN Search Dols Release TRANSLATION CHAPTER 29
28.7	Erman, who is of the same family as Ardwahift, at the end of the Gathas, is the fifty-seven years of Sóšāns, and because of this very fact, Erman, since the ašam vohu which is at the end of Erman's Yasna, has together fifty-seven words, because the twenty-four words of Erman, the twelve of the alom vohu and the twenty-one of Erman's Yasna (make) together fifty-seven.
29.1	Namely, that the body, whose components are flesh, bones, nerves, and other (things), is like a house made from clay, plaster, wood, and other (things).
29.2	The agent of growth is the frawashi, which makes the arms and legs grow, brings forth masculinity or femininity, composes the veins and nerves and assembles the bones, brings forth the ways and passages, and opens the doors and windows like the architect who gives shape to the house.
29.3	And the vital soul that keeps the body alive is like the fire that one founds on (one's) throne under the dome
29.4	And this is why (it is) like the dwelling of the fire on the hearth, which spreads heat on all sides, projects brightness and light through the door, makes itself visible in the rooms, and itself lives on food. If it remains without food, it will become weak and powerless; the sides of the dome will first cool down, and when it is completely extinguished, the whole dome will be cold; likewise, the brightness and lightness that were seen will be invisible. In the same way, the substance of the vital soul is light and heat, and its dwelling is in the heart like the fire on the hearth, and the blood flowing in the veins keeps the whole body warm, raises the brightness and light, and projects them through the two windows on the head, which are the eyes themselves. The sight of the eyes, the smell of the nostrils, the hearing of the ears, the taste of the mouth, the touch of bodies, and the movement of form (are) of the same nature
29.5	And the organization of the living (body) (is done) by the food, the water and the fire, which (is) in the body, separated moderately, in this way and (following) indication: as for preparing food, a pot in which there is food and water, was placed on the fire, and the fire from the outside and the water from the inside are heated, until the food reaches the measure, which is necessary, (then) it will be removed from the mannlie IN The tools
29.6	For the stomach is like a pot that keeps food and water inside, and by the vital fire they are properly heated. When it has reached its limit, it draws into the liver by a natural force what is luminous and powerful, it conducts it from the liver into the veins and the venules to the head and the rest of the body, and on the brain of the head it increases; the sight of the eyes and the other senses (come) from it, and likewise the arms and legs receive strength from it, and it expels outside what is not necessary by the force of expulsion. Finally, the death of the vital soul, from not having eaten, (brings about) the weakening of the vital fire, subsequently the cooling of the arms and legs and the exit (of the fire) from the heart, the whole body becoming cold, and the separation of the light from the eyes are in the very likeness of the extinction of the fire
29.7	And the general-in-chief, the soul, sovereign and organizer of the body, which is in it its own leader and foundation, is like the one who lights the fire, whose function is to carefully keep the dome pure and healthy and to light the fire.
29.8	And when the body is asleep, the soul goes out, whether near or far; it goes and considers things; at the moment of awakening, it returns to the body. It is as when the fire is lit, the function of the one who lights it is to stand near it; if the fire is asleep, the door of the dome being closed, it (can) go away, whether near or far
29.9	But while fire (is in) material beings and the dome is a fabrication by material beings, and the one who lights the fire is a human, (on the other hand) the vital soul is menog by the Creator's creation, and the organizer of the body is the soul which is menog. It is not possible to show by all reasons the division, the specificity, and how it is made, even by strong knowledge to those who seek reasons.
29.10	But it is possible to show menog to material beings by reason, analogy, resemblance, and signs, which is possible.
29.11	Just as a man saw a one-horned rhinoceros in the country of India and was unable to seize it and bring it back to Iran, but with a view to showing it to the Iranians, he painted one exactly like it on a wall in a beautiful design.
30.1	Namely, that he is similar to the celestial sphere in the shape of a ball, which rotates, which has four points, each point (having) three stars, for overall man is composed of four (things) which are the corporeal, the vital, the cognizing, and the animate.
30.2	Each has three divisions people IN
30.3	The corporeal has three: the solid, the liquid, and the gaseous.
30.4	The solid has seven layers, the innermost of which is the marrow; around the marrow (are) the bones, around the bones the flesh, around the flesh the nerves, around the nerves the veins, around the veins the skin, and around the skin the hair.
30.5	And the marrow needs the moon, whose adversary is the planetary moon, which, like the moon god, at the time of growth, with its healthy nature increases the marrow, (but) the planetary moon destroys it, which, among the planets, holds the innermost layer.
30.6	And above the moon is Mercury, and its dwelling is in the bones.
30.7	And above Mercury is Venus, and its dwelling is in the flesh. Then it forms the eyebrows, eyelashes, and hair. And it has essentially three functions: to cause growth, to increase, and to protect. To cause growth is like when it causes the arms and legs and other instrumental limbs to appear through growth. To increase is when it increases (them) to the limit of completion To protect is when it firmly protects them within their limits and place.
30.8	And above Venus, there is the sun and its home is in the nerves.
30.9	And above the sun, there is Mars and its home is in the blood veins.
30.10	And above Mars, there is Jupiter and its home is in the skin that beautifies the body.
30.11	And above Jupiter, there is Saturn and its home is in the hair.
30.12	And here are its images: Saturn hair Jupiter skin Mars veins Sun Venus nerves Mercury chair Moon Bone marrow OS chair nerves veins skin hair
30.13	The revolution of the moon (takes place) in one month, that of Mercury in three months, that of Venus in six and a half months, that of the sun in one year, that of Mars in one and a half years, that of Jupiter in twelve years, that of Saturn in thirty years
30.14	The water in the body is essentially four (liquids): blood, phlegm, red bile, and black bile.
30.15	The substance of blood is hot and moist, and its color is red, its taste sweet, and its location is in the liver. Phlegm is cold and moist, and its color white, its taste salty, and its location is in the lungs. Red bile is hot and dry, and its color red, turning yellow, its taste bitter, and its location is in the gallbladder. And black bile is cold and dry, and its color black, its taste sour, and its location is in the spleen people IN Search Share
30.16	First of all, among the humors, the blood goes into the folus, and then in the bubbling it throws the foam into the folus, then it collects it and transforms it into phlegm. Then the gallbladder which is above the liver draws upwards what is subtle and sharp, and (this) becomes red bile, (for) it constantly keeps its mouth open. The red bile flows into the stomach which digests the food. Then (the) thick liquid which remains again is thrown into the spleen and becomes black bile
30.17	After all these four humors, (there are) the seeds that reside at the top of the head in the brain. They go through the veins in the back (which) draw back to the head, for a proportionate composition, a force from all four (humors); they gather a force from the whole body, strengthen it in (its) nature, in the form of seed it pours out and thereby the potentiality to exist and the generation of men is made.
30.18	The four humors of different nature and function are (similar) to the four classes of men: the priests who teach, the warriors who strike, the farmers who feed, and the artisans who render service.
30.19	The seed is above them like the sovereign above the four classes
30.20	This is also why the sovereigns are called the protection of Iran, for, as the seed draws to itself a force from all the members of the body, and through the flow the mark of a body is formed by it, in the manner of light, so whoever among the subjects on the path of the law (or divine) acts according to the desire and action of the sovereigns
30.21	The breath resides in the heart, so it is naturally neither hot nor cold, and through the fire in the heart, with which the cold and moisture from the lungs are mixed, it heats and keeps the whole body warm in the same measured way. The four forces of the body likewise progress through the (breath), just as running waters through the wind. When through the heating of the heart fire, (the breath) becomes excessively hot, it flows outward through the force of exhalation, through movement, and through the frawashi of the atmosphere it receives coolness and through inhalation it returns to the heart. By collecting and returning the moderate force, the breath of the frawashi keeps the body alive.
30.22	The vital has three (divisions): the vital soul, consciousness, and frawashi
30.23	And the vital soul is luminous and hot and of the same substance as fire, (as) a guide with the seed, of the nature of fire, it enters (its) place <i.e. in the womb>. In the fourth month, by heating, it appears in the form of a body. First the eyes are drawn, and its fiery light results in vision through the eyes. Puts because of the complete creation of the head, (the vital soul) takes place in the top of the brain. Second IN place, in the form of fire it goes into the heart and there is its principal region. Thirdly, according to the same division, it descends in the form of fire into the stomach, takes a place there, and in the same connection it organizes all three (organs), for first the food and drink that sustains the vital soul enter the stomach. By the combat between Hordad and Amurdad, it kindles the fire and from there the brilliance goes into the heart; it strengthens the fire that is in the heart, and from the heart, the hot breath of a single nature of the living soul takes place in the three fires that (are) in the body.
30.24	And their different functions are clear.
30.25	For from what is in the brain of the head, the senses are divided, which are sight, hearing, smell, taste, and touch
30.26	And what is (in) the heart, the main function is, by the breath of expiration and inhalation and by a great fire, to heat all the bodies; the movement of the limbs (comes) from the same force.
30.27	And what is in the stomach is divided into four forces which are: that which attracts, that which takes, that which digests and that which expels.
30.28	The attractive force which draws food and drink into the stomach and its own dwelling is similar to the steward who buys spices and meat, (to make) meals and (sends) them home.
30.29	And (the force) taking in through the orifice heats the stomach and collects the clear and strong water, and divides it into four, and sends the blood to the liver, the phlegm to the lungs, the red bile to the gallbladder and the dark bile to the spleen, (is similar) to someone who divides food
30.30	The (force) that expels is like a broom.
30.31	And of these three fires, the one in the head is of the nature of priests, and the Farrbay fire is the most helpful to it; the one in the heart is of the nature of warriors, and the Gušnasp fire is the most helpful to it; and the one in the stomach is of the nature of farmers, and the Burzen-Mihr fire is the most helpful to it.
30.32	Consciousness is mingled with the vital soul, and the latter (receives) perceptions from consciousness with discernment; as long as it (is) with it, the corporeal soul has strength When the body acts thus/falls asleep, the vital soul is in the body, the ruvăn-soul outside and the consciousness acts as a messenger between them and receives from the ruván-soul outside and the consciousness acts as a messenger between them and receives from the ruvân-soul the information, shows it to the vital soul and this one conflates it to the intelligence, the guardian. And finally when the body dies, because of (its) *fiery substance, when (the consciousness) goes from the earth into the měnōg, it is first mixed with fire and during the three days after death, waiting by the body it does not cease to watch over the corpse of the body and to weep over it. And when the dogs and the IN TRANSLATION CHAPTER 30 Birds come forward and want to tear the body apart; she is afraid like a sheep of a wolf. And she argues with the dogs and the birds: "Do not eat this body of mine, which Ohrmazd, in the end, will also remake for me in the body to come."
30.33	On the third night, at dawn, the soul of the wicked man's body, when they separate from each other, will argue with the conscience: "Tol, conscience, you are going to the better existence, but you are abandoning me here!"
30.34	If (he is) a righteous man, (the conscience) with the soul will claim from the gods the lot of those who have acted (well), like the strategists and consultants who at the end of the battle go with the commander-in-chief to the sovereign's court and receive the reward of good counselors
30.35	The frawashi that causes growth, with the seed, enters its place, and over time, it causes the state of seed to pass from that of mixture, and from that of mixture to excess blood, and then it forms the eyes and the other limbs, and afterward, it forms the trunk and causes the ribs to grow from the trunk like branches by budding from the tree. And then it determines the function of the organs inside the child's womb, and then it causes the arms, legs, and fingers to grow. The marrow advances from the head toward the fingers, like frozen snow
30.36	The knowers (are) three: intelligence searches, memory protects, and wisdom discerns.
30.37	The animate has three (divisions): the soul in the body, the soul outside, the soul in the celestial world
30.38	The corporeal soul is called like the body itself, for it is itself the mênôg of the body, similar to a general who is sent to fight the enemy and whose function is to maintain order in the entire army and all means. And it is it that thinks, says, and carries out what it wills, whether it is virtuous in good or perverse in evil. And it is it that is shown again the reward for good deeds and the punishment for bad deeds according to the same measure in the mênôg, and its origin has two causes, namely, it is capable of knowledge and endowed with strength. If it has used knowledge and strength in an unfounded manner, or if there have been requests and questions, and it has not wanted them, it has gone to the limit of ignorance, which is the greatest guide to hell
30.39	Just as is shown in Religion, namely that (for) the man of little wisdom his lack of wisdom is the worst (thing). This C IN Search Q Share TRANSLATION CHAPTER 30 Again, that being content with little wisdom is a guide to hell. Also, that through bad science which (flows) from bad information, men especially become wicked and destined for hell, whether those who have died until now, or those who will die from now on
30.40	And Lie deceives them and appropriates them for two reasons: first, by fulfilling nature's desire to grasp a little happiness in this world mixed with sin, which is the sin of the soul. Second, by abstaining, by being just, (i.e., priest) from war, that is, not helping the combatants. Since he completely fulfills nature's desire, he will be condemned for what he does because he corrupts creatures, and since he acts thus (i.e., by abstaining from war) by being just, he is guilty of not helping his fellow men
30.41	And the service also for which (the soul) obtains the reward has two causes: first, by a perfect intention and a patient nature, to strike down desire, lust, anger, and hatred in its own nature, and not to accomplish what is not fitting; second, to make good creatures grow by striving for it and to satisfy the righteous.
30.42	When (the soul) advances out of the world of mortal (beings), if it is righteous and saved, because of its victory, all its fellow men of nature advance with it
30.43	Then, on behalf of the stõš, the messenger Něryõsang arrives. The vital soul, the conscience, the frawashi, and the soul that Astöwihåd, Way the wicked, and the other destroyers have disturbed and separated from (their) joint strength, he will reunite them and organize the appearance and form, and in the happiness that reaches the soul, all the friends will participate, and will receive strength and happiness from each other.
30.44	But if (he is) a damned person, the vital soul, the conscience, the frawashi, the soul that is on the way and the soul that watches, and (his) friends, will turn away from him; the corporeal soul, (despite) its repentance, will go alone to hell like one who is surprised by enemies
30.45	The soul that is on the way is a good spirit and pure in nature, and it has been thus organized in relation to the body: just as the desire of the body is to eat food and to be covered with clothing, the desire of the soul when (it is) in the body is to distribute and give justly food to the hungry and clothing to (those who are) naked. Just as the desire of the body is to sleep day and night as it pleases, the desire of the soul when (it is) in the body is to seek day and night the wisdom of the righteous. IN the sins she has committed and shows her, as a good counselor, the pure and right path, and for every activity in which her body (was engaged), she (i.e., the soul that is on the way) desires to send her to the Assembly(?).
30.47	The guide, the soul that is on the way, advances and reaches the Assembly before the body. When those who are worthy present themselves with a request, the soul that is on the way gives this advice to the soul that is in the body: "First respond with a gift and do not speak of what for you is not a (true) gift."
30.48	And if the body thinks, speaks, and acts well, the soul that is on the way, by these same good thoughts, good words, and good deeds, puts on a garment and advances from the direction of the south, ascends, and blesses the body. If (the body) thinks, speaks, and acts badly, as a result of these same bad thoughts, bad words, and bad deeds, (the soul) is clothed in a garment of darkness, advances from the direction of the north, descends into darkness, and curses the body.
30.49	The soul, which is the guardian and treasurer of meritorious deeds in this place, is divided into twelve forms and signs, which are the form of man, the form of woman, the form of water, and the form of plant
30.50	And this is why the creatures of this world are seven, which are divided into twelve, and the satisfaction for the twelve good creations, and the meritorious acts which are produced by the same body, the same spiritual signs (mënōg) accept them, guard them and watch over them
30.51	The adversary of this soul is a spiritual druz with twelve forms that run through hell and accept the sin produced by the injury to good creatures. They oppose the twelve good menogs, the likeness of an ugly man and a prostitute, and the male and female xrafstars. The adversaries of fire are the burning druz, the stinking north wind, and other destructive agents. Thus, equivalent to the metal form and the stone form are cutting by a blade and striking by a stone; equivalent to the earth form is a dwelling that is like a prison in hell; equivalent to the mountain form is a stone whose heaviness is on the soul; opposed to the water form and the plant form are the worst foods and drinks similar to mud, foods similar to the body's excretions
30.52	When the body is dead, on the third night, at dawn, for the righteous, first a form of wind comes to meet him from the side of the southern luminaries, like the most perfect wind, this wind is a messenger of joy who possesses the good news of paradise. Then the form of water and the form of a plant stand in a kind of (place) similar to a garden provided with water, abundant in young trees full of buds, into which his soul advances. Then a form of a young girl and a form of a man, then a form of a white bovine, male and female. Then a form of fire which makes him cross the Činwad bridge and which strikes the darkness of hell. And then he IN Search tools Q Share is like a mountain on which the soul ascends, and then a form of metal and a form of stone in the likeness of a golden throne, finally a form of earth which is itself for (the donkey) an eternal dwelling.
30.53	Then these twelve menogs are together composed in one force,
30.54	first the earth which resembles a dwelling, with many shining houses, in which there are inner and outer houses and lower and upper stories, most agreeable to nature and most rejoicing for the soul.
30.55	And then the form of water and the form of plant are like a kind of (endrolt) similar to a garden in which different springs flow, and from where they flow, different kinds of all forms of plants, flowers, perfumes, buds and buds grow and ripen fruit
30.56	And the form of fire will shine before her in the dwelling, and the permanent fragrances of fragrant plants will exhale from it, and the form of stone and the form of metal will change into many jewels and shining metals by which the dwelling will become beautiful and delightful, and the garments and ornaments that are carved into many forms will appear in the dwelling according to the same division.
30.57	The form of animal will change into five species and many kinds: on land there will be the forms of quadrupeds, in the water the forms of fish, and in the air the forms of birds which, with their pleasant voice, rejoice the soul
30.58	And as the living rejoice in milk and meat, for the soul, from the forms of animals is milked milk and butter and many other kinds of (things) from which they are produced, so that for the animal form there is no sadness, and there is a change from the form of animal and bird into the form of meat, and from the form of meat back into the form of animal and bird.
30.59	The wind blows naturally in the manner of the wind, in the house and the garden and the springs of water, it brings to the soul (the fragrances) from all sides.
30.60	The form of man appears to the soul in many forms, sometimes in the aspect of the elderly like the father in relation to children, sometimes in middle age like the brother with (his) brothers, sometimes in the form of children like the son towards parents, sometimes in the manner of friends like fellow students and colleagues
30.61	Likewise the form of woman (appears) in the appearance of women, sometimes as the mother, sometimes as the sister, sometimes as the daughter, sometimes as the (married) wife and sometimes as the maid and others who give pleasure IN for
31.1	For the reason that the two worlds are constantly changing for each other <just as there are men and women, and birth into this world is a passage from the mēnōgs, and the passage out of this world is a birth into the měnõg, just as when one is born from the mênög into this world (getig), it is by the help of fathers and mothers, and through a narrow passage one leaves the body of the mothers: there are some who fall from the body stillborn, there are some who are born naturally, without sensations, without being able to speak or walk, with the need of a nursing mother. Then in the course of time, through an abundant saiste of material force, he learns to speak and walk; After the care of the mothers, he is again entrusted to the education of the fathers, and upon reaching adulthood he will choose (his) profession and be active in his own trade. Likewise, when he leaves this world, he will be able to reach the garden(?) with the help of the male form <and the female form>, who are themselves the father and mother of the soul.
31.2	Three days after death, when the soul is in fear, it is like the three days before birth when the (burning) wind struggles in the body.
31.3	On the fourth day, the female form welcomes the soul and leads it over the Činwad Bridge, the "passage of lamentations," terrifying, like the mother at the birth of children.
31.4	The damned one is like the stillborn who is rejected from the body, and he falls into hell
31.5	The one who is saved will go with the help of the woman's form to the world of the menogs, and this same woman's form will be his nurse and will teach him the language of the menogs, and then the man's form will teach him the manner, the sign, the kind, and the way of the menog's activities. Then, when he has been taught and educated, he will choose the profession that is essentially included in four (categories), which are the priesthood, the warrior function, agriculture, and crafts.
32.1	As is shown by analogy in the writings on the Adversaries, that whoever in this world has an activity, or a capacity, or a greatness, or a function in which he is fit and he is attached to it, because of the righteousness that he possesses and puts into practice with profit, this kind of action, capacity, greatness, and function are united to his soul, and in the měnôg also they will be in the same way IN Search tools Q Share
32.2	Like Jam, because he restrained terror, anguish, and catastrophe, his soul is celebrated and invoked for the removal of the drought that (destroys) pastures, of the terror and danger that moves in secret, which were created by demons.
32.3	Likewise, Frědön, for having chained Až i Dahâk, is invoked for the removal of those who commit injuries like dragons.
32.4	And Garšasp, for having killed brigands and thieves, is invoked for the removal of the injuries of those who act like thieves.
33.1	It is said: "O Frašoštar, you must act there with generosity," that is, you must practice generosity in the Garödmän. As he was in this world the Court Counselor of Wištāsp, so he will be the Court Counselor in the ménög, it is revealed by religion, and other things also in the same way and manner, just as the one who made water flow in this world (will be) the one who makes rain in the měnōg Colophon (ms.TD): Completed in peace, joy, and happiness. I, servant of religion, Göbedšah Rustam Bundär Šähmardän, wrote and set aside. In the land of the fortunate (people) of Kirmân, I wrote for the appropriation of my child Fredon to practice the <Good> Religion! May it be according to the will of the gods! In the name of the gods, the victorious good religion of the Mazdeans. Words of Zādspram son of Gušn-Jam, from the south.
34.1	It has been shown in Religion that Zoroaster asked Ohrmazd: "Will the corporeal beings who have died on earth become corporeal again during the Renovation, or will they be like those who have no shadow?"
34.2	Ohrmazd replied: "They will be corporeal again and will rise."
34.3	And Zoroaster asked: "He who is dead, separated by dogs and birds and carried off by wolves and vultures, how will he be reassembled?" IN Search tools M when Share
34.4	Ohrmazd replied: "You, Zoroaster, want to make a wooden box. How will it be easier for you to make it if you have no bowls and you have to cut and assemble it, or if there is a box but its planks are disjointed, they have to be assembled again?"
34.5	Zoroaster replied: "If the wood had been a single piece, it would have been easier than if there had been no wood, and if there had been the planks of the box, (it would have been easier) than if there had been no box."
34.6	Ohrmazd said: "These creatures, when they did not exist, I was able to create them. And now that they have existed and are destroyed, it is easier to compose them again."
34.7	"For I have five storekeepers who receive the corporeality of the dead. One is the earth under whose supervision are the flesh, bones, and sinews of men. Another is water, guardian of blood; another is the plants that preserve hair and fur. Another is light, receiver of fire; another is the wind, (guardian) of the vital soul of my creatures."
34.8	At the time of Renovation, I will summon the earth and demand from it the bones, flesh, and sinews of Gayōmard and the other (men).
34.9	The earth will say: "How shall I return them, since I do not know whose <these bones, this flesh, and these sinews are and whose those are?"
34.10	I will summon the water of the Arang, which is the Tigris, among the rivers, saying: Return the blood of the dead men!"
34.11	The water will answer (me): "How shall I return it, since I do not know whose blood this is and whose that is?"
34.12	I will summon the plants and I will demand from them the hair of the dead men.
34.13	The plants will answer (me): "How shall we return them, since we do not know whose hair these are and whose those are?"
34.14	I will summon the wind and I will demand from it the vital soul of the dead men
34.15	The wind will answer me: "How shall I return it, since I do not know whose this vital soul is and whose that one is?"
34.16	I, who am Ohrmazd, when I look again at the earth, the water, the plants, the light, the wind, will know with clear knowledge and I will discern them one from the other, for by omniscience and clear reflection, I will distinguish them one from the other, as when the milk of females, on earth, flows in the same canal, (I distinguish) one in the other, I recognize which of my females (it is). Just as, when a man has thirty mares, for each there is a container on which there is a mark (indicating) for which mare (it is); when the milk is milked and the thirty containers are together, if he wishes to know, he takes each bowl and recognizes the brand on the container, which of my mares (it is). people IN A Find tools
34.17	I will send Erman the messenger, whose function is the fulfillment of the end.
34.18	He will bring back the bones, blood, hair, light, and vital soul of Gayōrnard, Mašč, and Mašänë.
34.19	And first I will assemble Gayōmard's bones again, and those of Maše and Mašāně joined together, I will create on the right and on the left.
34.20	And it is easier for me to assemble and recreate the twelve creatures I originally created First, when I arranged the sky without columns, without support, which had no support on any side, from material (beings), and secondly, when I arranged the earth in the middle of the sky such that it was not closer on any side whatsoever, in the resemblance of the yolk of an egg to the middle of the egg. And thirdly when I created the sun, fourthly when I created the moon, fifthly <when ​​I created the stars, sixthly when I created among the plants many kinds of colors and ornaments, seventhly when I created in the plants the fire which does not burn, eighthly when I brought to the earth the cereals, and in the time of growth they bear fruit and serve as food for men and animals. Ninth, when I arranged the child in the mothers, being hidden so that it <does not> die, and I made appear separately in growth the bones, the blood, the hair, the phlegm, the nerves, and the nails. Tenth, when I made the birds fly in the atmosphere, provided with a body by wings. Eleventh, when I created the water, which flows, in the resemblance of one who has feet (?). Twelfth, when I created the clouds above> which take away the water that makes the rain fall.
34.21	The creation of creatures, the propagation of religion, and the accomplishment of Renovation are similar to the construction of a house.
34.22	As the house is completed by three means: the ground, the walls, and the roof, so the creation of creatures is the ground, the propagation of religion the walls, and the accomplishment of Renovation the roof
34.23	As when a man wants to prepare a house, he chooses three men, one of whom is the most experienced in preparing the ground, another in raising the walls, and another in making the roof, and he sets them to work separately: until the ground is prepared, it is not possible to raise the walls.
34.24	The one who commissioned the house clearly knows how long it will take to complete, and to be certain of the skill of the one making the roof, he is assured, when the walls are finished, that for the one whose function is to (make) the roof, it is as easy to make the roof as for the two (others) who have been assigned their task IN Search tools Q Share
34.25	And again the accomplishment of the Renovation is like the dark night when the night draws to a close, the sun comes out from three sides of the world, and having returned to its proper place, completes its revolution, then it will shine again and strike the darkness.
34.26	It is like the moon which waxes for fifteen (days) and wanes for fifteen (days); when it is completely invisible, it is reborn again; from the sun, the sovereign of luminaries, it appears luminous; the resurrection of the dead in the world and the re-creation are manifested thereby.
34.27	It is like the year: in spring the trees are in bud, in summer they bear fruit, in autumn the end of the fruit arrives, and in winter they are dry and as if dead
34.28	When the order of the year is complete, the sun has returned to its first place, and day and night are equal, with the same length and measured as in the beginning (?). And the resurrection of the dead is like dry trees; new leaves grow and buds blossom.
34.29	For the re-creation to be solid, all natures will ultimately be similar (to what they were) in the beginning, like men whose existence flows from seed, like plants whose existence (comes) from seed, the complete completion (will be made) by the same seed
34.30	It is thus revealed in religion that, when Ahreman rushed against the creatures, he had as partners the species of impious prostitute demons, just as a man has concubine women, there he himself is the king of the demons, and the impious prostitute demon is herself his queen, chief of all the prostitute demons, the fiercest adversary of the Righteous Man.
34.31	And with him (Ahreman) mated the impious prostitute demons, his daughters, to corrupt the females, so that he would corrupt the females, and because of the corruption of the females, so that they would corrupt the males and turn away from their duty.
34.32	And then he chose his chief general who is Concupiscence (Az), and four generals were created as collaborators, who are Anger, Winter, Old Age, and Danger, like the generals of the east, west, south, and north.
34.33	Lust chooses a commander on the right and one on the left, who are hunger and thirst; <likewise Anger...; likewise Winter.......> likewise Old Age (has) complaint and lamentation, and likewise Danger, excess, and deficiency.
34.34	At the Renovation, first the means (against) Lust will be sought, because she is the chief general of the other Druz. The strength of Ahreman the impious (comes) most from her, IN Search ols Q Share
34.35	Even during the original propagation of creatures, when Zurvân brought Ahreman for movement this form of dark, ash-colored clothing, by this pact (which said): "This is the weapon that is burning like fire, and all creatures will be oppressed by it, (for) it contains the very essence of Concupiscence. When the time of nine thousand years has come to an end, what you originally assumed, namely that you would guide all bony existence toward enmity toward Ohrmazd and love toward tol, which is even the belief in a single principle, namely that the one who makes increase is the one who strikes, you will not perfectly complete it (Then) with weapons, Concupiscence will devour what is yours, your creatures, it itself will die of hunger, because it will not find food among the creatures of Ohrmazd, like a frog that lives in water and as long as it pollutes the water, it itself lives in it, but if the water withdraws from it, it dies dried up.
34.36	And lust, being of a single nature, could not corrupt as long as creatures were dispersed, so it divided its forces into three to enter creatures together, (forces) which are: natural, unnatural, and outside of nature. Natural: when it is in what is possible to eat to which the vital soul is linked; unnatural: the propensity for copulation which calls itself lust, such that in seeing outside what is inside is stipulated and the nature of the body is excited; outside of nature: the desire for any food, which one sees or hears about.
34.37	Each level is divided into two: what is natural is hunger and thirst; what is unnatural is to pour out and receive (seed); what is outside of nature is to hoard with greed and not give out of avarice
34.38	It is this in which evil is included, and it is revealed that in the end, to find a means against Concupiscence, Ardwahišt will come to earth with the joint force of Erman the messenger. He will point out to creatures the grave sins of killing (different) species of animals, and the little benefit that results from it. He will also order this: "You who are men, do not kill animals like you have killed them before.
34.39	When the Renovation is near, those who obey Ardwahist's orders will turn away from killing animals and eating (their) meat, and the force of Concupiscence will diminish by a quarter, and the stench in their bodies will be removed, the darkness will be partially stricken, the menogrous condition will be more fully clothed in nature, and the sciences will be acquired more clearly
34.40	In the bodies of the children born from it, lust will be weaker and the body less stinking and more linked to the nature of the gods, they will turn away from drinking the lust will decrease by half In Search Dols AND Share
34.41	These generations, due to not drinking, will be fragrant, not very dark, of a menog nature, and not capable of procreating.
34.42	And then the demon of Concupiscence, because he has not found strength through the creatures of Ohrmazd, will argue with Ahreman, who had designated him as the commander of the generals, and he is temporarily the leader among (his) creatures, (saying): "Make me satisfied and full, for I do not obtain through the creatures of Ohrmazd the strength (that comes) from food."
34.43	At Ahreman's command, he will destroy the lesser demons; finally, the four generals will remain, and the other two, Ahreman and Concupiscence
34.44	Ohrmazd and Ahreman, Sroš and Concupiscence, will come to earth, and Ohrmazd will strike Ahreman. As long as Concupiscence is joined to Ahreman, no way will be found, because Ohrmazd is the creator of all light and Ahreman's darkness is his adversary, Sroš the just and moderate is the mēnōg of measure and the excess and deficiency of Concupiscence are his adversaries and companions in combat
34.45	But since Concupiscence is not united with Ahreman, Ahreman will be alone, and his opponents will be three: two of a different essence, Ohrmazd and Sroš, and one of the same essence, Concupiscence, the most united with him. But since his help has turned into enmity, his adversary will be victorious.
34.46	When, fifty-seven years before the accomplishment of the Renovation, Söšāns will be reborn to complete what was given to Zoroaster
34.47	It is revealed about Zoroaster that he came to converse with Ohrmazd at the age of thirty, and he received the religion and propagated its law. In fifty-seven years, the religion reached the (different) parts of the seven climes. When the religion was propagated, the Druz, as a result of (their) visibility, (fled) underground, and their forces became partly powerless.
34.48	When the messenger who completes (the Renovation), who is Söšāns, with Erman as his guide, appears on earth, he will converse in the same way with the Mēnōgs for thirty years. The law of the accomplishment of the Renovation, through perfect development in fifty-seven years, will progress in the seven climes, and through (this) perfect development, the Druz will be rejected far from the creatures
34.49	When the aggressor has come upon the creatures, there will remain six thousand years of the calculation, going (each year) from the month of Fravardin and day of Ohrmazd until the following period, from the month of Fravardin and day of Ohrmazd. At the completion of the six thousand years the equivalent of four years is left, because every four years, an intercalary day is not added; in six thousand years, this becomes equivalent to four years. At that time, there will be a sign of the resurrection of the dead, and the firmament will move, the movement of the sun, IN Anr Search pols Q Share The moon and stars will be abnormal (?), like the firmament revolving in the air and the seas, and all the inhabitants of the earth will turn away from their natural (path); on the earth, like springs of water, springs of fire will spring forth in many places.
34.50	It is because Ohrmazd created (everything) through water that (everything) will end in fire, for water has a luminous and growth-promoting nature, but fire is burning and thwarts the seed, whereas when the seed of plants reaches the water, it receives the force of growth and becomes greenery
34.51	When fire appears on the earth, the waters will diminish, and the rain will also refrain from falling, until the water in the earth is returned as much (as possible) to deserts, and the natures on the earth, because of the union with fire, will change color into brown (?) and dark blue (?), and will become weak and powerless
34.52	When (there remain) three months until the resurrection of the dead, once again the battle will be great as in the original creation, in the battle against the druz, (where) there were ninety days and nights of war, a battle of thirty days and nights with the rain that struck the prafstars, (another) of thirty days and nights with the heating of the dew thanks to which the plants grew, one of thirty days and nights with the wind that drove away the water and made the earth slope and rise, hollow and flat.
34.53	But as this great battle at the beginning (was carried out) by the fall of the water and by the wind that attracts (?) the water, it (will be) at the end, by the heating and brightness of the fire and the violent wind that kindles the fire
34.54	As (originally) in ninety days and nights, the gods were in combat with the demons as numerous, in the final (combat) there will be seen clearly during the nights in the atmosphere (someone) with the appearance of a man, having the form of fire, esteemed as one of the Menögs, having a fiery mount similar to a horse, (and men) will become very assured.
35.1	As it is shown in religion that we are seven of the same thought, same word, and same deed, who as a result of our same thoughts, same words, and same deeds, are without old age, death, corruption, and decay.
35.2	If you who are men, of the same thought, same word, and same deed, you will be without old age, illness, corruption, and decay like we who are the Ameshas spentas people IN
35.3	In order that this union might be established on earth, immortal sovereigns were created, each of whom lives in a strong fortress, so that there are those who live high above the earth, to whom the path leads through a sea of ​​darkness, and there are those who dwell on the summit of a great mountain
35.4	The names of the seven are thus revealed in religion: there are those of the race of Erëz, that is, the Tree that drives away suffering, Ašern yahmai ušta, and Yöišt son of Friyān and Göbedšah, and there are those of the race of Töz, who are Ašawazdād son of Porudāšt, one whose name is Fradāšt son of Xumbig, who for fear of Anger was raised in a pitcher, <another) Pěšyõtan who is called Cihro-Mahan>
35.5	As the seven are divided into twelve, which are Ohrmazd, two divisions are separated, sovereignty and very great wisdom, Wahman, two (divisions) which are good and thought, Ardwahišt, two (divisions) which are righteousness and excellence of reverence, Šahrewar, two (divisions) which are sovereignty and desire, Spandarmad, two (divisions) which are growth and perfect thought, Hordad and Amurdäd which, because they have the same aspect, are a pair, the libation is given forever to (them) both, (until) the accomplishment of the Renovation
35.6	Thus among them, three immortals in the snow with six wečastag, who are Tös and Wew, and the one whose (body) is immortal, Garšasp, whose height is five hundred spears (nãy) of Zoroaster, and the năy of Zoroaster as I measured it from the stature, which was in the (temple) of the Fire Framgar, of three and a half nãy, with which are one thousand seven hundred and fifty-nine frawashis of the righteous who were designated to guard it safe and sound. The fourth is Kay Xusrô who will resurrect them all
35.7	As the sovereignty of the seven Amesha Spentas was arranged and organized by the seven sovereigns for the accomplishment of the Renovation, so too is the septenary of the seven Amesha Spentas established by religion.
35.8	Zoroaster, who received religion, is similar to Ohrmazd, since he learned the omniscient religion, the science of Ohrmazd, and he remained in it, and became omniscient and taught
35.9	The first to accept religion praised Ašwahišt, the quality of ahu and ratu of Ohrmazd, and in the vanguard was Medyömäh son of Ärästäy, he hastened to become a disciple of Zoroaster since Ārăstăy and Porušasp were brothers.
35.10	Likewise the most valiant, the good ruler was Kay Wištāsp, (symbol) of Šahrewar.
35.11	Hutōs, wife of Wištāsp, the most helpful to Zoroaster, (is a symbol) of Spandarmad.
35.12	The generous and good-bred Frašoštar and Jāmāsp who, because of their mutual relationship, through supplication are said in praise (the sym- IN indivual Release bole) of Hordad and Amurdad; by this union the immortality of believers is established.
35.13	In religion, concerning the resemblance of Zoroaster to Ohrmazd, while Ohrmazd created the six Amesha Spentas from his own thought, word, and deed, as the instrument of perfect Thought, perfect Word, and perfect Action, as a result Zoroaster (had) from his own nature three sons in the image of Wahman, Ardwahišt, and Šahrewar, and under their authority he divided three territories which are the land <of....>, the var that Jam made, and the fortress of Kang. And his three daughters (were) in the image of Spandarmad, Hordad, and Amurdad
35.14	Also the great union of the agents of Renovation (will be done) in the same way by seven men whose xvarnah comes from the seven Amesha Spentas, first Söšans sons of Zoroaster in the Xwanirah, Röšn-čašm and Xwar-čašm in Arzah and Sawah, through whom the sun, the eye of the world, comes and goes, Frådat-xwarrah and (Widat-xwarrah) in Fradadafs and Widadafs, Worunem and Worusüd in Worubaršt and Worujaršt
35.15	When they wish to complete the Renovation, to celebrate a Yasna concerning the Renovation, the immortal creatures of the (different) species will be gathered together like the celebration of the Yasna by which Zoroaster was converted. It is revealed that instead of the (ordinary) hôm, (there will be) the life-giving white hõm, which is in the seas, by which the dead will become alive and the living immortal; instead of milk, (there will be) the milk of the Hadayoš ox which is kept in a metal fortress under the authority of Göbedšāh; instead of fire, (there will be) the great fire which guards the living creatures; instead of the Yasna (there will be) the sacrifice and praise concerning the accomplishment of the Renovation of the good (Creation).
35.16	Söšans will establish himself in the Xwanirah on the priest's seat (zöt), as will the six agents of Renovation in the six regions, as hawanan, ädurwaxš, fraburdär, äburd, äsnadär and rětwiškar
35.17	And the seven Amesha Spentas will take their places in the minds of the seven agents of Renovation, Ohrmazd the priest (zör) with Sõšans, Wahman: hawanān with Rošn-čašm, Ardwahišt: adurwaxs whose sign is fire with Xwar-čašm, Šahrewar: fraburdår with Frädat-xwarrah, Spandar-mad: aburd with Widat-xwarrah, Hordad äsnadär with Worunēm, Amurdad: rëtwiškar with Worusüd, each in his region, and because of the common will of the seven Amesha Spentas, what one thinks, then all will know, what one says, all will recite, what one does, all will see
35.18	As it is said in the Spand (Nask): "These men will see each other in thought by holy wisdom, as people now (see each other) with their eyes. These men will converse in thought by holy wisdom, as people now (converse) with their tongues IN Search pols Q district Share
35.19	In the month of Spandarmad, on the day of Aštād, in the time of Uzērin, under the priesthood of Söšans and the union of all six agents of Renovation, for the rise of all (beings) of the luminous race, they will sing the Yasna of the accomplishment of Renovation.
35.20	The Yasna celebrated is in the resemblance of what Jam did, when he made (people) circle with the golden instrument, the trumpet. Sõšans the victorious will cry: "Rise, O corporeal ones, who are guarded by the gods, (since) you have died!"
35.21	On earth will come Erman, the efficient, and Söšans, the agent of Renovation, with the strength of the luminaries
35.22	Erman the messenger will have a net in his hands, for every man who has died, to which a thread is hung, like the animal net in which birds and fish are caught, and beneath the earth he will be stretched out in hell.
35.23	At call and response, one-fifth of the dead will rise from the earth, provided with a body and a vital soul, with stature and countenance as when they died, from that earth where their vital soul left corporeality.
35.24	They will rise two by two: father and son, wife and husband, master and disciple, the one who commands and the one who obeys.
35.25	The name Uzërin gäh comes from the action of rising
35.26	At the (time of) Ebsrüsrim, Ebgyä, they will similarly perform a Yasna for the vital soul (gyan) of all the (beings) of the luminous race; a fifth will arise and then give them the vital soul, and the name ebgyä (aibi.gaya) comes from the vital soul (gyan).
35.27	At the time of Ušahin, for the immortality of all the (beings) of the luminous race, they will similarly perform a Yasna; they will become immortal, and the name ušahin comes from "Immortality" (ahoših).
35.28	And at the time of Hawan, for the union of all beings of the luminous race, they will likewise make a Yasna, the wind bearing good news that summons the agents to the assembly, the fifths (gathered) from all directions, will lead (them) to the assembly of Isadwästar in the middle of the earth, and the name Hawan comes from "meeting."
35.29	At the time of Rapihwin, for the happiness of all beings of the luminous race, they will likewise make a Yasna. At that time they will recognize one another, greet one another, in short, what has happened to their souls, they will describe it, they will rejoice in one another, and the name Rapihwin comes from "happiness" (ramišn).
35.30	In the days of Asman, Zamyad, Maraspand, and Anagran, and in the time of Ahunawad until the time of Uzerin, every day in the time of Uzerin, a fifth of the dead will rise, in the time of Ebsrüsrim they will be endowed with a vital soul, in the time of Ušahin they will become immortal, in the time of IN Search Dols Q Share Hawan they will be called to the union of the assembly, at the time of Rapihwin They will rejoice one over another.
35.31	And at the time of Ahunawad, two hours before evening, that is, the twelfth of a day and a night, Ohrmazd in the company of Srôš the righteous will come from the side and from the southern boundary to the Assembly, he will sit on the throne of all advantages, which has its own lol.
35.32	The manifestation of the saved among the damned will be like white horses among black horses.
35.33	The messenger whose function is to strike the darkness of the night will separate the righteous from the wicked, he will place the righteous on one side, the wicked on the other, like the shepherd who distinguishes and separates the flock of white sheep from the black
35.34	All creatures, having recognized the wonders of Ohrmazd, will completely repent of their utter wickedness and their will (in the service of) Ahreman, and will firmly confess to Ohrmazd. /”35) Ahreman's great demons, the chief general Az (Concupiscence), and the other demons, as if stupefied, being defeated by their own adversaries, will become visible to men.
35.36	And because of this vision, men will turn away from Ahreman (to turn) towards Ohrmazd
35.37	And each of the luminous beings will strike his opponent: thus Wahman (will strike) Akoman, Ardwahist Indar, Šahrewar Sawar, Spandarmad Nänghalt, Hordad and Āmurdad Tauriz and Zariz, the soul of the ox, the druz of the wolf race, the mênōg of strength, the weakness that (comes) from old age.
35.38	As it is revealed in religion, by peace will be conquered discord, by generosity avarice, by perfect thought contempt, by truthfulness false speech, by righteousness druz, and by salvation damnation
35.39	When the time of nult comes, the Amesha Spentas will be mingled with the material signs, Ohrmazd with Sõšans and all men, so that they become of pure will, good knowledge, a safe place, and with immutable provisions; Wahman (mingled) with cattle, Ardwahišt with fires, Šahrewar with metals, Spandarmad with earths, Hordad with waters, and Amurdad with plants, so that each in his own nature, with purity and firmness, until the Gâthic Spandmad (day), remains in his own sign in the měnóg state. On the Gâthic Spandmad (day), they will come out of their sign. Ohrmazd in the Xwanirah and the six Amesha Spentas in the six regions will appear
35.40	Then at that time a great fire will come from the infinite light, it will cast its brilliance throughout the earth. He will hold in his hand a trunk, like a tree whose branches are above, its roots below. For each saved (being), there is a branch, for each damned a root. And Ahriš- IN V Ahriswang, of feminine nature, will stand at the top of the tree and the demon Anahr (?) at the base of the tree. And Ahriswang will give the saved a branch, and Anahr (?) the damned a root; they will be separated from each other, the damned from the saved.
35.41	At that time, all men will weep at once and shed tears on the earth, for the father will see his son thrown into hell, the son (his) father, the brother his brother, the wife her husband, the husband his wife, the friend his friend
35.42	The damned will cry out to the saved: "My father, my brother, my husband, my wife, my friend, how did you not teach me on earth pure and upright life and turn me away from sin or draw me toward good works, so that now, through separation from my relatives and friends, I must return to hell. But (otherwise) in the company (of the righteous) I would have gone to the luminous paradise, if you had shown me the peace of your thought, so that (I would know) for what reason the friend had considered me on earth worthy (of having) food, clothing, and a house, and in the mênôg would not have considered me worthy of the most pleasant foods, the most superb clothing, the most solid house, and the most swift horse!"
35.43	They will also blame other souls who have not shown their faults to their friends, and if they had shown them, then they will bring them before their eyes again. Because of this, there will be greater suffering. The branches are like a ladder that has three steps, as if made of gold. And the righteous will go through them to paradise, through good thought in the sphere of the stars, through good speech in the sphere of the moon, through good action in the sphere of the sun.
35.44	Those damned by the movement of these branches will fall into hell; they will fall down into three gates, (each) gate (being) like a sharp (?) blade dipped in evil thought, evil speech, and evil action; they will go to hell for three days and three nights
35.45	The righteous who are in Paradise will rejoice in their own thoughts, words, and deeds. The wicked in Hell will suffer from their evil thoughts, words, and deeds.
35.46	When the damned are brought back from Hell, those who sawed Jam will fall back into Hell in the form of a frog and will be there for three days.
35.47	On the day of Ohrmazd, at dawn, the menog of the earth, who is herself Spandarmad of perfect thought, mother of all those born on earth, who because of her nature as a mother, from the beginning when the druz rushed upon creatures until the last day, will affectionately forgive all creatures, for they are all her children, the righteous because of the misfortunes (that befell) their bodies, and the wicked because of the punishments (endured) by their bodies IN Search for ols Q Share
35.48	And she never made a request to Ohrmazd, for because of her perfect thought, until the complete end of affairs, patiently and without complaint, she will stand at that time before Ohrmazd, saying: "Their punishment is completely complete."
35.49	At the same time, Erman will bring all the damned.
35.50	The saved will also return to the earth, but not according to the appearance in which they died, and not according to the composition according to which they were previously made, but they will be made corporeally of luminous clay without darkness, of water without poison, of fire without smoke, of air fragrant and full of peace
35.51	And their bones through the light will be like crystal on jewels, and their flesh on their bones like coral on trees, and their sinews on their bones will be joined like a gold chain adorned with crystal, and their blood in their veins will flow like fragrant wine in a gold cup, and their humors in their bodies will be more fragrant than musk, amber, and camphor. (There will be) those who are tall, short, or medium-sized, to the measure of Gayōmard; in height and face they will resemble (people) of forty years of age.
35.52	Every man who on earth had only one wife will have one. He who had many will have many. He who had none will have a woman of the same height and face (as him). The man, because of the identical face of this woman, will hold her more lovable than all the women on earth. Women and men will be united and will not rejoice with others
35.53	And their gaze toward one another, in agreement and benevolence, will be like the superior toward the inferior. They will be attentive and benevolent like a father toward (his) children. The inferior will be obedient toward the superior, submissive, attentive, like creatures toward the creator Ohrmazd. IN IN
